FOR THE first four days it rained. I could hardly see where I was. Then it
stopped raining and beyond the lawn and outbuildings in front of my cottage I
saw fields with stripped trees on the boundaries of each field; and far away,
depending on the light, glints of a little river, glints which sometimes
appeared, oddly, to be above the level of the land.

The river was called the Avon; not the one connected with Shakespeare.
Later—when the land had more meaning, when it had absorbed more of my life than
the tropical street where I had grown up—I was able to think of the flat wet
fields with the ditches as “water meadows” or “wet meadows,” and the low smooth
hills in the background, beyond the river, as “downs.” But just then, after the
rain, all that I saw—though I had been living in England for twenty years—were
flat fields and a narrow river.

It was winter. This idea of winter and snow had always excited me; but in
England the word had lost some of its romance for me, because the winters I had
found in England had seldom been as extreme as I had imagined they would be when
I was far away in my tropical island. I had experienced severe weather in other
places—in Spain in January, in a skiing resort near Madrid; in India, in Simla
in December, and in the high Himalayas in August. But in England this kind of
weather hardly seemed to come. In England I wore the same kind of clothes all
through the year; seldom wore a pullover; hardly needed an overcoat.

And though I knew that summers were sunny and that in winter the trees went bare
and brushlike, as in the watercolors of Rowland Hilder, the year—so far as
vegetation and even temperature went—was a blur to me. It was hard for me to
distinguish one section or season from the other; I didn’t associate flowers or
the foliage of trees with any particular month. And yet I liked to look; I
noticed everything, and could be moved by the beauty of trees and flowers and
early sunny mornings and late light evenings. Winter was to me a time mainly of
short days, and of electric lights everywhere at working hours; also a time when
snow was a possibility.

If I say it was winter when I arrived at that house in the river valley, it is
because I remember the mist, the four days of rain and mist that hid my
surroundings from me and answered my anxiety at the time, anxiety about my work
and this move to a new place, yet another of the many moves I had made in
England.

It was winter, too, because I was worried about the cost of heating. In the
cottage there was only electricity—more expensive than gas or oil. And the
cottage was hard to heat. It was long and narrow; it was not far from the water
meadows and the river; and the concrete floor was just a foot or so above the
ground.

And then one afternoon it began to snow. Snow dusted the lawn in front of my
cottage; dusted the bare branches of the trees; outlined disregarded things,
outlined the empty, old-looking buildings around the lawn that I hadn’t yet paid
attention to or fully taken in; so that piece by piece, while I considered the
falling snow, a rough picture of my setting built up around me.

Rabbits came out to play on the snow, or to feed. A mother rabbit, hunched, with
three or four of her young. They were a different, dirty color on the snow. And
this picture of the rabbits, or more particularly their new color, calls up or
creates the other details of the winter’s day: the late-afternoon snow light;
the strange, empty houses around the lawn becoming white and distinct and more
important. It also calls up the memory of the forest I thought I saw behind the
whitening hedge against which the rabbits fed. The white lawn; the empty houses
around it; the hedge to one side of the lawn, the gap in the hedge, a path; the
forest beyond. I saw a forest. But it wasn’t a forest really; it was only the
old orchard at the back of the big house in whose grounds my cottage was.

I saw what I saw very clearly. But I didn’t know what I was looking at. I had
nothing to fit it into. I was still in a kind of limbo. There were certain
things I knew, though. I knew the name of the town I had come to by the train.
It was Salisbury. It was almost the first English town I had got to know, the
first I had been given some idea of, from the reproduction of the Constable
painting of Salisbury Cathedral in my third-standard reader. Far away in my
tropical island, before I was ten. A four-color reproduction which I had thought
the most beautiful picture I had ever seen. I knew that the house I had come to
was in one of the river valleys near Salisbury.

Apart from the romance of the Constable reproduction, the knowledge I brought to
my setting was linguistic. I knew that “avon” originally meant only river, just
as “hound” originally just meant a dog, any kind of dog. And I knew that both
elements of Waldenshaw—the name of the village and the manor in whose grounds I
was—I knew that both “walden” and “shaw” meant wood. One further reason why,
apart from the fairy-tale feel of the snow and the rabbits, I thought I saw a
forest.

I also knew that the house was near Stonehenge. I knew there was a walk which
took one near the stone circle; I knew that somewhere high up on this walk there
was a viewing point. And when the rain stopped and the mist lifted, after those
first four days, I went out one afternoon, looking for the walk and the view.

There was no village to speak of. I was glad of that. I would have been nervous
to meet people. After all my time in England I still had that nervousness in a
new place, that rawness of response, still felt myself to be in the other man’s
country, felt my strangeness, my solitude. And every excursion into a new part
of the country—what for others might have been an adventure—was for me like a
tearing at an old scab.

The narrow public road ran beside the dark, yew-screened grounds of the manor.
Just beyond the road and the wire fence and the roadside scrub the down sloped
sharply upwards. Stonehenge and the walk lay in that direction. There would have
been a lane or path leading off the public road. To find that lane or path, was
I to turn left or right? There was no problem, really. You came to a lane if you
turned left; you came to another lane if you turned right. Those two lanes met
at Jack’s cottage, or the old farmyard where Jack’s cottage was, in the valley
over the hill.

Two ways to the cottage. Different ways: one was very old, and one was new. The
old way was longer, flatter; it followed an old, wide, winding riverbed; it
would have been used by carts in the old days. The new way—meant for
machines—was steeper, up the hill and then directly down again.

You came to the old way if you turned left on the public road. This stretch of
road was overhung by beeches. It ran on a ledge in the down just above the
river; and then it dropped almost to the level of the river. A little settlement
here, just a few houses. I noticed: a small old house of brick and flint with a
fine portico; and, on the riverbank, very close to the water, a low,
white-walled thatched cottage that was being “done up.” (Years later that
cottage was still being done up; half-used sacks of cement were still to be seen
through the dusty windows.) Here, in this settlement, you turned off into the
old way to Jack’s cottage.

An asphalt lane led past half a dozen ordinary little houses, two or three of
which carried—their only fanciful touch—the elaborate monogram of the owner or
builder or designer, with the date, which was, surprisingly, a date from the
war: 1944. The asphalt gave out, the narrow lane became rocky; then, entering a
valley, became wide, with many flinty wheeled ruts separated by uneven strips of
coarse, tufted grass. This valley felt old. To the left the steep slope shut out
a further view. This slope was bare, without trees or scrub; below its smooth,
thin covering of grass could be seen lines and stripes, like weals, suggesting
many consecutive years of tilling a long time ago; suggesting also
fortifications. The wide way twisted; the wide valley (possibly an ancient river
course) which the way occupied then ran straight and far, bounded in the
distance by the beginning of a low down. Jack’s cottage and the farmyard were at
the end of that straight way, where the way turned.

The other way to the cottage, the shorter, steeper, newer way, up from the main
road and then down to the valley and the farmyard, was lined on the northern
side with a windbreak, young beech trees protected by taller pines. At the top
of the slope there was a modern, metal-walled barn; just a little way down on
the other side there was a gap in the windbreak. This was the viewing point for
Stonehenge: far away, small, not easy to see, not as easy as the luminous red or
orange targets of the army firing ranges. And at the bottom of the slope, down
the rocky, uneven lane beside the windbreak, were the derelict farm buildings
and the still living row of agricultural cottages, one of which Jack lived in.

The downs all around were flinty and dry, whitish brown, whitish green. But on
the wide way at the bottom, around the farm buildings, the ground was muddy and
black. The tractor wheels had dug out irregular linear ponds in the black mud.

The first afternoon, when I reached the farm buildings, walking down the steep
way, beside the windbreak, I had to ask the way to Stonehenge. From the viewing
point at the top, it had seemed clear. But from that point down had risen
against down, slope against slope; dips and paths had been hidden; and at the
bottom, where mud and long puddles made walking difficult and made the spaces
seem bigger, and there appeared to be many paths, some leading off the wide
valley way, I was confused. Such a simple inquiry, though, in the emptiness; and
I never forgot that on the first day I had asked someone the way. Was it Jack? I
didn’t take the person in; I was more concerned with the strangeness of the
walk, my own strangeness, and the absurdity of my inquiry.

I was told to go round the farm buildings, to turn to the right, to stick to the
wide main way, and to ignore all the tempting dry paths that led off the main
way to the woods which lay on the other side, young woods that falsely suggested
deep country, the beginning of forest.

So, past the mud around the cottages and the farmyard, past the mess of old
timber and tangled old barbed wire and apparently abandoned pieces of farm
machinery, I turned right. The wide muddy way became grassy, long wet grass. And
soon, when I had left the farm buildings behind and felt myself walking in a
wide, empty, old riverbed, the sense of space was overwhelming.

The grassy way, the old riverbed (as I thought), sloped up, so that the eye was
led to the middle sky; and on either side were the slopes of the downs, widening
out and up against the sky. On one side there were cattle; on the other side,
beyond a pasture, a wide empty area, there were young pines, a little forest.
The setting felt ancient; the impression was of space, unoccupied land, the
beginning of things. There were no houses to be seen, only the wide grassy way,
the sky above it, and the wide slopes on either side.

It was possible on this stretch of the walk to hold on to the idea of emptiness.
But when I got to the top of the grassy way and was on a level with the barrows
and tumuli which dotted the high downs all around, and I looked down at
Stonehenge, I saw also the firing ranges of Salisbury Plain and the many little
neat houses of West Amesbury. The emptiness, the spaciousness through which I
had felt myself walking was as much an illusion as the idea of forest behind the
young pines. All around—and not far away—were roads and highways, with brightly
colored trucks and cars like toys. Stonehenge, old barrows and tumuli outlined
against the sky; the army firing ranges, West Amesbury. The old and the new;
and, from a midway or a different time, the farmyard with Jack’s cottage at the
bottom of the valley.

Many of the farm buildings were no longer used. The barns and pens—red-brick
walls, roofs of slate or clay tiles—around the muddy yard were in decay; and
only occasionally in the pens were there cattle—sick cattle, enfeebled calves,
isolated from the herd. Fallen tiles, holed roofs, rusted corrugated iron, bent
metal, a pervading damp, the colors rust and brown and black, with a glittering
or dead-green moss on the trampled, dung-softened mud of the pen yard: the
isolation of the animals in that setting, like things themselves about to be
discarded, was terrible.

Away from the old farm buildings, and down the wide flat way which I thought of
as the old road to the farm and Jack’s cottage, there were other remnants and
ruins, relics of other efforts or lives. At the end of the wide way, to one side
of it in tall grass, were flat shallow boxes, painted gray, set down in two
rows. I was told later that they were or had been beehives. I was never told who
it was who had kept the bees. Was it a farm worker, someone from the cottages,
or was it someone more leisured, attempting a little business enterprise and
then giving up and forgetting? Abandoned now, unexplained, the gray boxes that
were worth no one’s while to take away were a little mysterious in the unfenced
openness.

On the other side of the wide droveway, its great curve round the farm buildings
just beginning here, in the shelter of young trees and scrub there was an old
green and yellow and red caravan in good condition, a brightly painted gypsy
caravan of the old days (as I thought), looking as if its horses had been
unhitched not long before. Another mystery; another carefully made thing
abandoned; another piece of the past that no longer had a use but had not been
thrown away. Like the antiquated, cumbersome pieces of farm machinery scattered
and rusting about the farm buildings.

Midway down the straight wide way, far beyond the beehives and the caravan, was
an old hayrick, with bales of hay stacked into a cottage-shaped structure and
covered with old black plastic sheeting. The hay had grown old; out of its
blackness there were green sprouts; the hay that had been carefully cut one
summer and baled and stored was decaying, turning to manure. The hay of the farm
was now stored in a modern open shed, a prefabricated structure which carried
the printed name of the maker just below the apex of the roof. The shed had been
erected just beyond the mess of the old farmyard—as though space would always be
available, and nothing old need ever be built over. The hay in this shed was
new, with a sweet, warm smell; and the bales unstacked into golden, clean,
warm-smelling steps, which made me think of the story about spinning straw into
gold and of references in books with European settings to men sleeping on straw
in barns. That had never been comprehensible to me in Trinidad, where grass was
always freshly cut for cattle, always green, and never browned into hay. Now, in
winter, at the bottom of this damp valley: high-stacked golden hay bales, warm
golden steps next to rutted black mud.

Not far from the decaying rick shaped like a hut or cottage there were the
remains of a true house, a house with walls that might have been of flint and
concrete. A simple house, its walls perhaps without foundations, it was now
quite exposed. Ruined walls, roofless, around bare earth—no sign of a stone or
concrete floor. How damp it felt! All around the plot the boundary
trees—sycamore or beech or oak—had grown tall, dwarfing the house. Once they
would have been barely noticeable, the trees that, living on while the house had
ceased to be, now kept the ground chill and mossy and black and in perpetual
shadow. Smaller houses beside the public roads, houses built by squatters in the
last century, farm laborers mainly, had established ownership rights for the
builders and their descendants. But here, beside the grassy droveway, in the
middle of downs and fields and solitude, the owner or the builder of the house
had left nothing behind; nothing had been established. Only the trees he had
planted had continued to grow.

And just as the modern prefabricated shed had replaced the old rotting hayrick,
so—but far away, not a simple addition to the old farm buildings—the true barn
was now at the top of the hill, beside the windbreak. It had galvanized tin
walls; it would have been rat-proof. There machinery caused everything to go;
and the powerful trucks (not nowadays the wagons that might have used the flat
drove-way to the old barn at the bottom of the valley) climbed up the rocky lane
from the public road and pulled into the concrete yard of the barn, and the
spout from the barn poured the dusty grain into the deep trays of the trucks.

The straw was golden, warm; the grain was golden; but the dust that fell all
around—on the concrete yard, the rocky lane, the pines and young beeches of the
windbreak—the dust that fell after the grain had poured into the trays of the
trucks was gray. At the side of the metal-walled barn, and below a metal spout,
there was a conical mound of dust that had been winnowed by some mechanical
means from the bigger conical mounds of grain in the barn. This dust—the mound
firm at the base, wonderfully soft at the top—was very fine and gray, without a
speck of gold.

New, this barn, with all its mechanical contrivances. But just next to it,
across an unpaved muddy lane, was another ruin: a wartime bunker, a mound
planted over with sycamores, for concealment, and with a metal ventilator
sticking out oddly now among the trunks of the grown trees. The sycamores would
have been planted at least twenty-five years before; but they had been planted
close together, and they still looked young.

That idea of ruin and dereliction, of out-of-placeness, was something I felt
about myself, attached to myself: a man from another hemisphere, another
background, coming to rest in middle life in the cottage of a half-neglected
estate, an estate full of reminders of its Edwardian past, with few connections
with the present. An oddity among the estates and big houses of the valley, and
I a further oddity in its grounds. I felt unanchored and strange. Everything I
saw in those early days, as I took my surroundings in, everything I saw on my
daily walk, beside the windbreak or along the wide grassy way, made that feeling
more acute. I felt that my presence in that old valley was part of something
like an upheaval, a change in the course of the history of the country.

I noticed his hedge first of all. It was well clipped, tight in the middle, but
ragged in places at ground level. I felt, from the clipping, that the gardener
would have liked that hedge to be tight all over, to be as complete as a wall of
brick or timber or some kind of man-fashioned material. The hedge marked the
boundary between Jack’s fruit and flower garden and the droveway, which was very
wide here, bare ground around the cottages and the farm buildings, and nearly
always soft or muddy. In winter the long puddles reflected the sky between
black, tractor-marked mud. For a few days in summer that black mud dried out,
turned hard and white and dusty. So for a few days in the summer the hedge that
ran the length of the garden that Jack possessed with his cottage was white with
chalk dust for a foot or so above the ground; in winter it was spattered with
mud, drying out white or gray.

The hedge hid nothing. As you came down the hill with the windbreak you could
see it all. The old rust-and-black farm buildings in the background; the
gray-plastered cottages in front of them; the ground or gardens in front of the
cottages; the emptiness or no-man’s land in front of the cottage grounds or
gardens. And beside Jack’s garden, Jack’s hedge: a little wall of mud-spattered
green, abrupt in the openness of the droveway, like a vestige, a memory of
another kind of house and garden and street, a token of something more complete,
more ideal.

Technically, the gardens were at the front of the cottages. In fact, by long
use, the back of the cottages had become the front; and the front gardens had
really become back gardens. But Jack, with the same instinct that made him grow
and carefully clip (and also abruptly end) that hedge beside the droveway,
treated his garden like a front garden. A paved path with a border of some sort
ran from his “front” door all the way down the middle of his garden. This should
have led to a gate, a pavement, a street. There was a gate; but this gate, set
in a wide-meshed wire-netting fence, led only to a wire-fenced patch of earth
which was forked over every year: it was here that Jack planted out his annuals.
In front of this was the empty area, the no-man’s land between droveway and the
beginning of the cultivated down. Jack’s ducks and geese had their sheds in that
area, which was messy with dung and feathers. Though they were not penned in,
the ducks and geese never strayed far; they just walked back and forth across
the droveway.

Hedge, garden, planting-out bed for annuals, a plot for ducks and geese; and
beyond that, beyond the ground reserved for the other two cottages, just where
the land began to slope up to the farm’s machine-cultivated fields, was the area
where Jack grew his vegetables.

Every piece of ground was separate. Jack didn’t see his setting as a whole. But
he saw its component parts very clearly; and everything he tended answered the
special idea he had of that thing. The hedge was regularly clipped, the garden
was beautiful and clean and full of changing color, and the goose plot was
dirty, with roughly built sheds and enamel basins and bowls and discarded
earthenware sinks. Like a medieval village in miniature, all the various pieces
of the garden Jack had established around the old farm buildings. This was
Jack’s style, and it was this that suggested to me (falsely, as I got to know
soon enough) the remnant of an old peasantry, surviving here like the
butterflies among the explosions of Salisbury Plain, surviving somehow
industrial revolution, deserted villages, railways, and the establishing of the
great agricultural estates in the valley.

So much of this I saw with the literary eye, or with the aid of literature. A
stranger here, with the nerves of the stranger, and yet with a knowledge of the
language and the history of the language and the writing, I could find a special
kind of past in what I saw; with a part of my mind I could admit fantasy.

I heard on the radio one morning that in the days of the Roman Empire geese
could be walked to market all the way from the province of Gaul to Rome. After
this, the high-headed, dung-dropping geese that strutted across the muddy,
rutted way at the bottom of the valley and could be quite aggressive at
times—Jack’s geese—developed a kind of historical life for me, something that
went beyond the idea of medieval peasantry, old English country ways, and the
drawings of geese in children’s books. And when one year, longing for
Shakespeare, longing to be put in touch with the early language, I returned to
King Lear for the first time for more than twenty years, and read in Kent’s
railing speech, “Goose, if I had you upon Sarum Plain, I’d drive ye cackling
home to Camelot,” the words were quite clear to me. Sarum Plain, Salisbury
Plain; Camelot, Winchester—just twenty miles away. And I felt that with the help
of Jack’s geese—creatures with perhaps an antiquity in the droveway lands that
Jack would not have guessed—I had arrived at an understanding of something in
King Lear which, according to the editor of the text I read, commentators had
found obscure.

The solitude of the walk, the emptiness of that stretch of the downs, enabled me
to surrender to my way of looking, to indulge my linguistic or historical
fantasies; and enabled me, at the same time, to shed the nerves of being a
stranger in England. Accident—the shape of the fields, perhaps, the alignment of
paths and modern roads, the needs of the military—had isolated this little
region; and I had this historical part of England to myself when I went walking.

Daily I walked in the wide grassy way between the flint slopes, past chalk
valleys rubbled white and looking sometimes like a Himalayan valley strewn in
midsummer with old, gritted snow. Daily I saw the mounds that had been raised so
many centuries before. The number of these mounds! They lay all around. From a
certain height they were outlined against the sky and looked like pimples on the
land. In the beginning I liked to tramp over the mounds that were more or less
on my walk. The grass on these mounds was coarse; it was long-bladed, pale in
color, and grew in ankle-turning tufts or clumps. The trees, where they existed,
were wind-beaten and stunted.

I picked my way up and down and around each mound; I wanted in those early days
to leave no accessible mound unlooked at, feeling that if I looked hard enough
and long enough I might arrive, not at an understanding of the religious
mystery, but at an appreciation of the labor.

Daily I walked in the wide grassy way—perhaps in the old days a processional
way. Daily I climbed up from the bottom of the valley to the crest of the way
and the view: the stone circles directly ahead, down below, but still far away:
gray against green, and sometimes lit up by the sun. Going up the grassy way
(and though willing to admit that the true processional path might have been
elsewhere) I never ceased to imagine myself a man of those bygone times,
climbing up to have this confirmation that all was well with the world.

There was a main road on either side of the Henge. On those two roads trucks and
vans and cars were like toys. At the foot of the Henge there was the tourist
crowd—not very noticeable, not as noticeable as one might imagine from the
fairground atmosphere around the stones when you actually went to them. The
tourist crowd, from this distance, was noticeable only because of the red dress
or coat that some of the women wore. That color red among the visitors to
Stonehenge was something that I never failed to see; always someone in red,
among the little figures.

And in spite of that crowd, and the highways, and the artillery ranges (with
their fluorescent or semi-luminous targets), my sense of antiquity, my feeling
for the age of the earth and the oldness of man’s possession of it, was always
with me. A vast sacred burial ground, bounded by the sky—of what activity those
barrows and tumuli spoke, what numbers, what organization, what busyness in
these now virtually empty downs! That sense of antiquity gave another scale to
the activities around one. But at the same time—from this height, and with that
wide view—there was a feeling of continuity.

So the idea of antiquity, at once diminishing and ennobling the current
activities of men, as well as the ideas of literature enveloped this world
which—surrounded by highways and army barracks though it was, and with the very
clouds in the sky sometimes seeded by the vapor trails of busy military
airplanes—came to me as a lucky find of the solitude in which on many afternoons
I found myself.

Larkhill was the name of the army artillery school. In my first or second year
there was something like a fair or open day there when, in the presence of the
families of the soldiers, guns were fired off. But the lark hill I looked for on
my walk was the hill with ancient barrows where literally larks bred, and
behaved like the larks of poetry. “And drown’d in yonder living blue the lark
becomes a sightless song.” It was true: the birds rose and rose, in almost
vertical flight. I suppose I had heard larks before. But these were the first
larks I noticed, the first I watched and listened to. They were another lucky
find of my solitude, another unexpected gift.

And that became my mood. When I grew to see the wild roses and hawthorn on my
walk, I didn’t see the windbreak they grew beside as a sign of the big
landowners who had left their mark on the solitude, had preserved it, had
planted the woods in certain places (in imitation, it was said, of the positions
at the battle of Trafalgar—or was it Waterloo?), I didn’t think of the
landowners. My mood was purer: I thought of these single-petaled roses and
sweet-smelling blossoms at the side of the road as wild and natural growths.

One autumn day—the days shortening, filling me with thoughts of winter
pleasures, fires and evening lights and books—one autumn day I felt something
like a craving to read of winter in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight, a poem I
had read more than twenty years before at Oxford as part of the Middle English
course. The hips and the haws beside the windbreak, the red berries of this dead
but warm time of year, made me want to read again about the winter journey in
that old poem. And I read the poem on the bus back from Salisbury, where I had
gone to buy it. So in tune with the landscape had I become, in that solitude,
for the first time in England.

Of literature and antiquity and the landscape Jack and his garden and his geese
and cottage and his father-in-law seemed emanations.

IT WAS his father-in-law I noticed first. And it was his father-in-law I met
first. I met him quite early on, while I was still exploring, and before I had
settled on a regular daily route. I walked or picked my way down little-used
lateral lanes on the hillsides, lanes deep in mud, or overgrown with tall grass,
or overhung with trees. I walked in those early days along lanes or paths I was
never to walk along again. And it was on one of those exploratory walks, on a
lateral lane linking the steep rocky road beside the windbreak with the wider,
flatter way, it was on one of those little-used, half-hidden lanes that I met
the father-in-law.

He was fantastically, absurdly bent, as though his back had been created for the
carrying of loads. A strange croaking came out of him when he spoke to me. It
was amazing that, speaking like that, he should attempt speech with a stranger.
But more amazing were his eyes, the eyes of this bent man: they were bright and
alive and mischievous. In his cadaverous face, of a curious color, a gray color,
a swarthiness which made me think of gypsy origins, in his cadaverous face with
a bristle, almost a down, of white on cheek and chin, these eyes were a wonder
and a reassurance: that in spite of the accident that had permanently damaged
his spine, the personality of the man remained sound.

He croaked. “Dogs? Dogs?” That was what the croaking sounded like. He stopped,
raised his head like a turtle. He croaked; he raised a finger of authority. He
seemed to say, “Dogs? Dogs?” And it needed only an echoing word from
me—“Dogs?”—for him to subside, be again a bent old man minding his own business.
His eyes dimmed; his head sank down. “Dogs,” he muttered, the word choking in
his throat. “Worry pheasants.”

Beside the lane, and in the shelter of trees, were hedge-high cages with
pheasants. It was new to me, to see that these apparently wild creatures were in
fact reared a little like backyard chickens. As it was new to me to understand
that the woods all around had been planted, and all the alternating roses and
hawthorns beside the windbreak of beech and pine.

In the hidden lane, a little impulse of authority, even bullying, with someone
who was a stranger and, in terms of gypsy-ness, twenty times as swarthy. But it
was the briefest impulse in the old man; and perhaps it was also a social
impulse, a wish to exchange words with someone new, a wish to add one more human
being to the tally of human beings he had encountered.

He subsided; the brightness in his eyes went out. And I never heard him speak
again.

Our paths never really crossed. I saw him occasionally in the distance. Once I
saw him actually with a load of wood on his bent back: Wordsworthian, the
subject of a poem Wordsworth might have called “The Fuel-Gatherer.” He walked
very slowly; yet in that slowness, that deliberation, there was conviction: he
had set himself a task he certainly intended to finish. There was something
animal-like about his routine. Like a rat, he seemed to have a “run,” though
(apart from looking after the pheasants, which might not have been true) it
wasn’t clear to me what he did on the land.

The droveway, the way along the floor of the ancient river valley, was very
wide. When I first went walking it was unfenced. In my first year, or the
second, the wide way was narrowed. A barbed-wire fence was put up. It ran down
the middle of the way, where the way was long and straight; and those sturdy
green fence posts (the thicker ones stoutly buttressed) and the taut lines of
barbed wire made me feel, although the life of the valley was just beginning for
me, that I was also in a way at the end of the thing I had come upon.

How sad it was to lose that sense of width and space! It caused me pain. But
already I had grown to live with the idea that things changed; already I lived
with the idea of decay. (I had always lived with this idea. It was like my
curse: the idea, which I had had even as a child in Trinidad, that I had come
into a world past its peak.) Already I lived with the idea of death, the idea,
impossible for a young person to possess, to hold in his heart, that one’s time
on earth, one’s life, was a short thing. These ideas, of a world in decay, a
world subject to constant change, and of the shortness of human life, made many
things bearable.

Later, even older encroachments were revealed on the droveway. Looking down at
Stonehenge one summer, from the hill of larks, I saw, from the change of color
in the fields of growing corn beside the droveway, what must have been the ruts
of old cart or coach wheels. Because this way had been the old coach or wagon
road from Stonehenge to Salisbury, a road that because of mud needed to be much
wider than a paved road. Now some of the width of that old road had been
incorporated—a long time ago—into fields and was behind barbed-wire fencing.

This fencing-in of a great ancient way, this claiming as private property an
ancient wide riverbed, no doubt sacred to the ancient tribes (and at one end of
the wide valley, beyond the beehives, the caravan, the old hayrick, and the
ruined house with the big sycamores, at that end, below the thin grass on the
western bank, there were the marks either of ancient furrows or fortifications),
this emphasis on property should have made me think of the present, the great
estates by which I was surrounded, the remnant of the estate on which I lived.

I saw the farmer or the farm manager making his rounds in a Land-Rover. I saw
the modern grain barn at the top of the hill. I saw the windbreak up and down
that hill and saw that it had been recently planted, with the pines growing
faster than the beeches they were intended to protect (and already creating
something like a strip of woodland, with a true woodland litter of fallen
branches and dead wood). I saw the hand of man, but didn’t sufficiently take it
in, preferring to see what I wanted: the great geography of the plain here, with
the downs and the old river valley, far from the course of the present, smaller
river. I saw the antiquity; I saw the debris of the old farmyard.

In this way of seeing at that time what I wanted to see I was a little like
Jack’s father-in-law, who ignored the new fence that cut at many places into
segments of his run across the droveway. He ignored the new gates (they were
few) and stuck to his run, creating stiles and steps and padded passing-places
over and through the barbed wire, working in his old way, rolling blue plastic
sacks around the barbed wire and then tying them with spiral after spiral of
red-blond raffia or nylon.

The odd zigzag of the old man’s run was now revealed, as were its widest limits:
from the pheasant cages on the muddy, shaded lane on the far side of the hill
with the new barn, down that lane, across the droveway, and all the way up a
scrub-bordered field to the old wood on the northern slope. On a field gate
there, one day in my first summer, I saw a number of crows spreadeagled and
rotting, some recent, some less so, some already reduced to feathery husks. It
was strange to link this fierce act with the bent old man, who moved so slowly;
but when his mischievous eyes came to mind, his swarthy-white gypsy skin, his
strong, sly face, the act fitted.

A whole life, a whole enduring personality, was expressed in that run. And so
strong were the reminders of the old man’s presence, So much of his spirit
appeared to hover over his run, over his stiles and steps and those oddly placed
rolled-up plastic sacks, even those he had rolled up and tied long ago and were
shredding now, plastic without its shine, blue turning to white, so much did all
of this speak of the old man moving slowly back and forth on his own errands,
that it was some time before it occurred to me that I had not seen him for a
while. And then I understood that what I had been seeing for many weeks past,
many months past, were his relics.

He had died. There had been no one to record the fact publicly, to pass the news
on. And long afterwards, on the fences growing older themselves, those plastic
wraps or pads continued to bleach and shred away. Still with us, like the other
debris at the bottom of the valley—the roofless walls of the ruined house, the
antiquated farm machinery below the young silver birches, the other machinery
and discarded timber and metal below the beech trees at the back of the old farm
buildings, the metal bracket in the loading window of the superseded, crumbling
barn.

And it was a good while later that I got to know that the old man had lived and
died in Jack’s house, and that he was Jack’s father-in-law.

THE LANE that led up the hill to the new barn and then down to the cottages and
old farm buildings, the lane beside the windbreak of beech and pine and the
subsidiary hedge of field rose and hawthorn, had grown rough and broken. You
could easily have turned your ankle on it. The new farm management began to have
that lane mended.

Men and machines came one week, and a level black layer of mixed asphalt and
gravel was quickly laid down, in a few days. The black color and the machine
finish looked new and unnatural next to the tufted grass of the verges. But the
surface that had been so quickly laid down was meant to last: as if in pledge of
that, the yellow board of the road makers was set up on the public road, just
before the lane, and one end of the board was cut into a directional arrow.

I didn’t like the change. I felt it threatened what I had found and what I had
just begun to enter. I didn’t like the new busyness, the new machines, the
machine lopping of the hawthorn and wild rose which left them looking damaged.
And I didn’t want that new surface on the farm lane to hold.

I looked for cracks and flaws in it and hoped that the little abrasions and
water erosions I noticed would spread and make it impossible—fantasy taking over
from logic—for the machines to lay down a new asphalt mixture. Of course I knew
my fantasy was fantasy: though the farm was set among ruins of many sorts,
reminders of the impermanence of men’s doings, there was another side to men’s
work. Men came back, men went on, men did and did again. How small the caravels
were that crossed the Atlantic and intruded into the evenness of history on the
other side; how few the men in those small vessels, how limited their means; how
barely noticed. But they went back. They changed the world in that part forever.

So though the new asphalt layer was crushed here and there into dips by the
tractor wheels; and though the rain, running down the hill, sought out every
weakness and crack in the dips and dug out minute bits of asphalt from between
small stones and then dug more deeply into the loosened surface, and the
irregular edge of the surface was undermined by water running down in little
channels (miniatures of the larger channels of which our valley was a relic)
between the hard black crust and the soft, grass-covered earth, though there
were these things that made me feel that the lane might be reduced again to the
rocky, uneven condition in which I had first found it, yet the lane was made
good, and then made good again, and withstood the winter, which came fiercely
that year.

There was a blizzard on Christmas day, with the wind blowing from the northwest.
I found, when I went out in the early afternoon, that the snow had been blown
into a drift in the windbreak. A bank of snow, then, beside the lane; and in the
lee of every tree trunk, every sturdy twig, every obstacle, there was a sharp
ridge that indicated the direction of the wind.

The shape and texture of this snow drift reminded me of a climate quite
different: of a Trinidad beach where shallow streams—fresh water mingled with
salt, salt predominating or lessening according to the tides—ran from tropical
woodland to the sea. These streams rose and subsided with the tide. Water flowed
now from the sea to the pools of the woodland river, now in the other direction.
At every low tide the streams cut fresh channels in the freshly laid sand,
created fresh sand cliffs, which then, when the tide began to rise again, fell
neatly, segment by clean segment, into the rippled current: a geography lesson
in miniature. To me as a child these streams always brought to mind the
beginning of the world, the world before men, before the settlement. (Romance
and ignorance: for though there were no longer aboriginal people on the island,
they had been there for millennia.)

So the texture and shapes and patterns of the snow here on the down in the
windbreak and in its lee created, in small, the geography of great countries.
Like the little rivulets that ran between the steep grass verge and the new
asphalt crust of the lane. And this geography in miniature was set, as I
thought, or as I liked to think, in a vaster geography. The valley of the
droveway between the smooth low hills spoke of vast rivers hundreds of yards
across, flowing here in some age now unimaginably remote: a geography whose
scale denied the presence of men. There would have been a brimming river or flow
all the way from Stonehenge (and the plain beyond) to Jack’s cottage and then
along the droveway with the beehives and the caravan and stone shell of a house
and farm manager’s bungalow and suburban-style garden; there would have been a
river all there, a flat gray flow, debouching into or filling the valley of the
present river, a remnant, small-scale, human, beside which I sometimes walked
and where people now fished for trout, released by keepers. In that vast
geography created by the miniature landscape, and the fantasy of the droveway as
river channel, there was no room for men; that vision was a vision of the world
before men.

Beyond the brow of the hill the wind was keen; shelter was no longer provided by
the hill or the windbreak. A livid gray sky, a gray but warm dirtiness, hung
over the great plain, where the barrows were like pimples: the stone circles
lost in the snow, blurring the view at the edges, no sight of the colored
artillery targets. At the bottom of the hill, among the farm buildings (made
monumental by the snowfall), was the dead cottage of Jack: snow lying on the
ground about it (the droveway there normally so muddy and black) like a great
clean thing, like a remaking of the world.

The snow made for hard walking. But weather like this in this usually mild
valley revived in me a wish for extremes, though it was the cold and the damp
and the wet that had carried away Jack. His damaged lungs, in that damp valley
bottom, had denied him warmth even in the summer. (Something else, of course, if
there had been no cold or damp, would have carried him away.)

On my early walks, after having my fill of the Henge and the barrows, I had
looked for hares on one slope. Then, on another hill, at another season I had
looked for larks, trying to keep them in sight as they rose and rose, lift upon
lift, and watching for them as they dropped down. Now I looked for deer. A
family of three had appeared in the valley, coming from no one knew where, and
surviving in our well-tilled, well-grazed valley, dangerous over large tracts
with military gunfire, crossed at many places by busy highways, surviving among
us no one knew how.

They, the deer, had their run too. And it was in the hope of seeing them—in
addition to my excitement at the snow and the wind—that I tramped round the farm
buildings and up the droveway to the point from which there was a view of the
wood and the untilled open slope where the deer sometimes grazed. And
unbelievably—my Christmas reward!—they were there, in the snow. Usually, against
the wood, the deer were hard to see; lower down, against the chalky green and
brown of the bare slope, they were reddish-brown, warm, but they had to be
looked for. Now (like the rabbits of my very first week, coming out to feed on
the lawn in front of my cottage) the deer were dirty-looking, gray, dark against
the snow, easy marks for anyone who wished to knock them off.

I longed for those deer to survive. And they did. Towards the end of the winter
I discovered one in the wilderness at the back of my cottage, in the marshland
beside the river. He was a young deer and I caught sight of him one morning, all
eyes, among the beaten-down brown reeds. And there for many mornings in
succession I saw him. I stood on the rotting bridge over the black creek and
looked. The secret, then, to see him, to keep him where he was, was to hold his
eyes and to be still oneself. As long as you looked, he looked; as soon as you
moved or made a gesture he was away, running at first through the reeds and tall
grass and then giving the lovely leap that could take him clear over fences and
hedges.

The spring came. The new surface of the lane up the hill held. The new life of
the farm continued. And for the second year running Jack’s cottage and garden
were apart from the activity. His death, his funeral—like the death and funeral
of his father-in-law some years before—seemed to have happened secretly: one of
the effects of the country life, the dark road, the scattered houses, the big
views. His vegetable plot, overrun with weeds, was barely noticeable. His fruit
and flower garden grew more wild, the hedge and the rose bushes growing out. His
greenhouse at the back (really the front) became empty.

So much that had looked traditional, natural, emanations of the landscape,
things that country people did—the planting out of annuals, the tending of the
geese, the clipping of the hedge, the pruning of the fruit trees—now turned out
not to have been traditional or instinctive after all, but to have been part of
Jack’s way. When he wasn’t there to do these things, they weren’t done; there
was only a ruin. The new people in the other cottages didn’t do what he had
done. They seemed to have little regard for their bit of cottage land. Or they
saw it differently, or they had another idea of their lives.

The first year of Jack’s illness Jack’s wife had pretended that nothing had
changed; that Jack’s garden was still a garden. Now she didn’t pretend. She was
making ready to leave. And she was doing so in a matter-of-fact way. As though,
after all, in spite of appearances, in spite of the antique ways of her father,
in spite of Jack, little had been invested by her in that cottage, the life
attached to it, and those years of the garden.

She now had no connection with the farm or the land. The local council was going
to find a house or flat for her on a housing estate in the valley or in one of
the nearby towns, Amesbury, Salisbury, Shrewton, Great Wishford, or elsewhere.
She would meet more people; she would be nearer the shops. She was looking
forward to the move. The “traditional” life, at the bottom of the valley, in the
mud and damp around the farm, far from people, where you were shut up for the
evening if you didn’t have a car, the traditional life hadn’t been to her taste.

Still, she thought that Jack had had a good life.

She said, “On the Christmas Eve he got up and went to the pub, you know. He knew
he was going to die and he knew it was his last chance.”

She spoke quite casually, giving me this news, now more than a year old. She was
just making conversation.

She said, “He wanted to be with his friends for the last time.”

To be with his friends; to enjoy the last drink; to have the final sweetness of
life as he knew it. What an effort it would have taken! To have those blocks of
ice for lungs; to be incapable of getting warm; to be fatigued and faint; to
want nothing more than to lie down and close one’s eyes and sail away into the
fantasies that were claiming one. And yet he had roused himself and found the
energy to dress and had driven to the pub for the holiday, before his death.

Did he drive along the lane up and down the hill beside the windbreak? Or did
he, because it required less judgment, drive along the wide, rutted droveway?
That way, along the droveway, would have been more likely to get him to the pub
and back. But it would have shaken him up dreadfully—as I had seen him, in
another mood, shaken up one spring or summer Sunday afternoon, when his shout
had been touched with beer. That final trip to the pub served no cause except
that of life; yet he made it appear an act of heroism; poetical.

Across the lawn from my cottage there was a small old flint building. It was
covered with ivy, and the ivy was so thick and firm that pigeons roosted in it.
The building was square in plan and had a pyramidal roof. This roof appeared to
be open at the apex, and above that, on four stilts, was a second, miniature
roof of the same pyramidal shape. I was told that the building had been a
granary or storehouse and that it was some centuries old. It was not used now; I
never saw anyone go into it. It was preserved for its beauty and as something
from the past.

Not far from it, and still on the far side of the lawn, was a building that
pretended to be a rough old farmhouse. Its walls were made up of bits of brick
and stone and flint, the mixture suggesting rubble, peasant pickings. It was
about fifty years old and had been put up as one of the ancillary buildings of
the manor: a fives court or squash court, but built in this “picturesque” way to
suit the setting. Perhaps it had been used as a squash court for some time.
But—its “front door” permanently closed, its corrugated-iron roof sagging in
places, some of the glass panes of its windows fallen out—it had no function
now, had had none for many years. Like the boathouse on the riverbank; like the
round, two-story children’s house with the conical thatched roof in the
overgrown orchard.

The life of the manor had altered; the organization had shrunk. Needs that had
once ramified as if to match the resources and organization of the big house had
not been permanent. The manor too had its ruins.

Between granary and mock farmhouse, and beyond the manor wall, was the church.
To me in the beginning a church was a church, something built in a particular
way, with windows of a particular shape: ideas given me by the Victorian Gothic
churches I had seen in Trinidad. But I had that village church before my eyes
every day; and quite soon—this new world shaping itself about me in my lucky
solitude—I saw that the church was restored and architecturally was as
artificial as the farmhouse. Once that was seen, it was seen; the church
radiated its own mood, the mood of its Victorian-Edwardian restorers. I saw the
church not as “church,” but as part of the wealth and security of
Victorian-Edwardian times. It was like the manor to which my cottage was
attached; like many of the other big houses around.

The church stood on a pre-medieval site; that was what was said. But little
about the church as it now was had come down from that time. Not a piece of
flint; not a slab of dressed stone that framed the Gothic windows. And perhaps
not even the faith was old.

Just as it was hard to imagine the lives and religious impulses of the people
who had with immense labor turned this plain into a burial ground and preserved
its sanctity for centuries, so it was hard, though one stood on the very ground
and was exposed to the same weather (but not now the same dawns or sunsets:
always the vapor trails of aircraft), to enter into the spirit, the terrors and
the need for redemption, of the people who had worshiped a thousand years before
in the first Christian church on this site—that lay so close to me, just across
the lawn and beyond the play farmhouse.

Play farmhouse, renovated church. Had that been a kind of play, too, the
religion of the renovated church? Did the renovators share the old terrors? Or
was this faith something quite different, something touched with the sense of
history, the assurance of continuity, the sense of something owed to oneself?

When you looked down on the plain from the viewing point in the windbreak on the
hill, you could see Stonehenge to the west and the beginnings of the town of
Amesbury to the east. The River Avon ran through Amesbury. There were chapels
and abbeys here too, beside the river, wide and shallow at this point.
Amesbury—now a military town, with little modern houses and shops and
garages—was an old place. It was to a nunnery in Amesbury that Guinevere,
Arthur’s queen, the lover of Lancelot, had retired when the Round Table had
vanished from Camelot, all of twenty miles away at Winchester. A sign on the
road from Stonehenge, just before you entered Amesbury, celebrated the antiquity
of the town: with a coat of arms and a date, A.D. 979.

The historical feeling that had caused that sign to be put up had also brought
about the restoration of the chapels and abbeys of Amesbury, as well as of the
church that lay across the lawn from my own cottage: history, like religion, or
like an extension of religion, as an idea of one’s own redemption and glory.

Yet there was an uncelebrated darkness before the foundation of that town of
Amesbury in A.D. 979, as recorded by the sign. More than five hundred years
before that, the Roman army had left Britain. And Stonehenge had been built and
had fallen into ruin, and the vast burial ground had lost its sanctity, long
before the Romans had come. So that history here, where there were so many ruins
and restorations, seemed to be plateaus of light, with intervening troughs or
disappearances into darkness.

We lived still on one such plateau of historical light. Amesbury, founded A.D.
979. History, glory, religion as a wish to do the right thing by oneself—these
ideas were still with some people in the valleys round about, though there had
been some diminution in personal glory, and the new houses and gardens were like
the small change of the great estates of the last century and the beginning of
this century. These people—though they had come, many of them, from other
places—still had the idea of being successors and inheritors. It was because of
this idea of historical inheritance and succession that many new people in our
valley went to the restored church. The church had been restored for people like
them; it met their needs.

The church stood on an old site. I could believe that. Beyond the churchyard,
and more or less hidden by the church itself, the old flint churchyard wall, and
trees on the other side, were the sheds and buildings of the dairy. Did they
also stand on an old site? I had no trouble believing that they did. Because the
world—in places like this—is never absolutely new; there is always something
that has gone before. Shrine or sacred place before church, farm before farm, on
the site of an old ford set in a wood, first “walden,” then “shaw,” then
Waldenshaw. A hamlet between the water meadows and the flinty downs; a hamlet,
one of many, on the river highway.

New to the valley, overwhelmed by the luck of the near-solitude I had found in
this historical part of England, the solitude that had done away with my
stranger’s nerves, I had seen everything as a kind of perfection, perfectly
evolved. But I had hardly begun to look, the land and its life had hardly begun
to shape itself about me, when things began to change. And I had fallen back on
old ideas, ideas now not so much of decay, as of flux and the constancy of
change, to fight the distress I felt at everything—a death, a fence, a
departure—that undid or altered or threatened the perfection I had found.

It could have been said that the perfection of the house in whose grounds I
lived had been arrived at forty or fifty years before, when the Edwardian house
was still fairly new, its family life fuller, when the ancillary buildings had a
function and the garden was looked after. But in that perfection, occurring at a
time of empire, there would have been no room for me. The builder of the house
and the designer of the garden could not have imagined, with their world view,
that at a later time someone like me would have been in the grounds, and that I
would feel I was having the place—the cottage, the empty picturesque houses
around the lawn, the grounds, the wild gardens—at its peak, living in a beauty
that hadn’t been planned for. I liked the decay, such as it was. It gave me no
wish to prune or weed or set right or remake. It couldn’t last, clearly. But
while it lasted, it was perfection.

To see the possibility, the certainty, of ruin, even at the moment of creation:
it was my temperament. Those nerves had been given me as a child in Trinidad
partly by our family circumstances: the half-ruined or broken-down houses we
lived in, our many moves, our general uncertainty. Possibly, too, this mode of
feeling went deeper and was an ancestral inheritance, something that came with
the history that had made me: not only India, with its ideas of a world outside
men’s control, but also the colonial plantations or estates of Trinidad, to
which my impoverished Indian ancestors had been transported in the last
century—estates of which this Wiltshire estate, where I now lived, had been the
apotheosis.

Fifty years ago there would have been no room for me on the estate; even now my
presence was a little unlikely. But more than accident had brought me here. Or
rather, in the series of accidents that had brought me to the manor cottage,
with a view of the restored church, there was a clear historical line. The
migration, within the British Empire, from India to Trinidad had given me the
English language as my own, and a particular kind of education. This had partly
seeded my wish to be a writer in a particular mode, and had committed me to the
literary career I had been following in England for twenty years.

The history I carried with me, together with the self-awareness that had come
with my education and ambition, had sent me into the world with a sense of glory
dead; and in England had given me the rawest stranger’s nerves. Now
ironically—or aptly—living in the grounds of this shrunken estate, going out for
my walks, those nerves were soothed, and in the wild garden and orchard beside
the water meadows I found a physical beauty perfectly suited to my temperament
and answering, besides, every good idea I could have had, as a child in
Trinidad, of the physical aspect of England.

The estate had been enormous, I was told. It had been created in part by the
wealth of empire. But then bit by bit it had been alienated. The family in its
many branches flourished in other places. Here in the valley there now lived
only my landlord—elderly, a bachelor, with people to look after him. Certain
physical disabilities had now been added to the malaise which had befallen him
years before, a malaise of which I had no precise knowledge, but interpreted as
something like acedia, the monk’s torpor or disease of the Middle Ages—which was
how his great security, his excessive worldly blessings, had taken him. The
acedia had turned him into a recluse, accessible only to his intimate friends.
So that on the manor itself, as on my walks on the down, I had a kind of
solitude.

I felt a great sympathy for my landlord. I felt I could understand his malaise;
I saw it as the other side of my own. I did not think of my landlord as a
failure. Words like failure and success didn’t apply. Only a grand man or a man
with a grand idea of his human worth could ignore the high money value of his
estate and be content to live in its semi-ruin. My meditations in the manor were
not of imperial decline. Rather, I wondered at the historical chain that had
brought us together—he in his house, I in his cottage, the wild garden his taste
(as I was told) and also mine.

I knew that the life I had in the manor grounds was temporary and couldn’t last.
The future was so easy to see: a hotel or school or foundation taking over the
big house and setting the decayed grounds to rights, grounds where I now walked
with such pleasure, and for the first time in my adult life, and more and more
as my knowledge increased, felt in tune with the natural world. I dreaded change
both here and on the droveway; and that was why, meeting distress halfway, I
cultivated old, possibly ancestral ways of feeling, the ways of glory dead, and
held on to the idea of a world in flux: the drum of creation in the god’s right
hand, the flame of destruction in his left.

So for a week or more I balanced between the two things—anxiety, the idea of
flux—when I heard, from beyond the churchyard, the sound of a bulldozer or
something like it. The noise traveled through the ground, in vibrations; it was
not a noise that a window could shut out.

The cow sheds and dairy buildings beyond the churchyard were being pulled
down—structures of clay tiles and red brick that had been so much part of the
view as I came down the hill at the end of my walk, so natural and right, that I
had not paid them too much attention. Now, with the sheds gone, the ground
looked naked and ordinary; and the water meadows at the back were exposed, and
the trees on the riverbank. The clay tiles from the roofs were stacked up; the
roof timbers were stacked up (and how new they looked, though the buildings had
seemed to me so old). And then very quickly the open view was blocked out again,
with a wide prefabricated shed with slatted timber walls, and with the printed
name of the shed makers on a board or metal plate just below the apex of the
roof. (A shed like this, but without the slatted walls, had been put up, one or
two owners or managers before, at the edge of the old farmyard over the hill,
and not far from Jack’s cottage, to store hay, to replace the cottage-shaped
hayrick covered with black plastic sheeting on the droveway—that hayrick now
moldering away, the black plastic itself weathered, without its luster and
tension, no longer crackling when it flapped, its texture now rather like the
skin of very old people, like a faded rose petal.)

Change! New ideas, new efficiency. Before, on the roadside, at the entrance to
the dairy yard, there had been a wooden platform where the milk churns were
placed—set at that height to be easily picked up by the milk van or truck. There
were to be no churns now. There were to be refrigerated tanks, and milk was to
be collected by tanker.

Next to the metal-walled barn at the top of the hill, another prefabricated cow
shed was set up; and next to that, a modern milking building. This milking
building or milking “parlor” (quaint word) was a mechanical-looking affair. Its
concrete floor, set in a sloping field, looked like a concrete platform. It had
pipes and meters and gauges; and the men who worked the parlor, who corralled
the dung-stained cattle into the pens or channels, had something of the grimness
of industrial workers.

They drove up to the milking parlor in brightly colored cars (the colors
noticeable up there, against the soft colors of the downs, green and brown and
chalk and in the winter the blurred darkness of stripped trees). These cars,
when parked, helped to make the milking parlor and the barn and the new
prefabricated shed look like a little factory at the top of the hill.

The parlor hissed mechanically, electrically. But the new prefabricated shed
gave off a smell of dung. Some of the earth excavated for the foundations of the
parlor had been dumped between the parlor and the paved lane; in this area,
waste ground, grass grew thick and green, with a scattering of weeds and stray
wheat.

The brightly colored cars, the hum and hiss of the milking machine (the cows,
even with their dung, reduced to machine-managed objects), the tense young men,
conscious of their style, their jeans and shirts, their mustaches and cars—they
were all aspects of the new, exaggerated thing that had come upon us.

Twice a day the milk tanker went grinding up the hill, up the resurfaced lane,
to empty the refrigerated milk tanks of the new milking parlor. With the farm
tractors and the motorcars of the new workers, my walk in the lane beside the
windbreak was at times like a walk on a public road; I had to watch for traffic.

On the public road, the thatched cottage with the pink walls and the straw
pheasant on the ridge of the roof lost a little more of its first character. So
pretty, so like a postcard, when I had first seen it, so like something one had
always known, with its rose hedge and its small, polished windows. The dairyman
would have loved it too, I am certain; but, like me at the beginning, he would
have seen its beauty as a natural attribute of the country setting; and he had
lived in the house as he might have lived in a house in the town from which he
had come, without any feeling that anything was owed to the house in which he
and his family lived; having all his life considered houses, even those in which
he lived, as belonging to other people. Basins and pots and pans and bits of
paper and tins and empty boxes had been left out in the garden; and some of
those things had stayed there even after the dairyman and his family had gone.

Now part of the hedge and the wire fence were taken down, so that the car of the
new couple could be parked off the public road. The car was important to the new
people, more important than the house. They were young people, without children;
and they handled the house in a new way. It was a place of shelter, no more:
temporary shelter for a temporary job. The wife sunbathed in the front garden
whenever she could; and perhaps this was why the front door was often open. That
open front door was very unsettling.

The house as a place of shelter, not as a place to which you could transfer (or
risk transferring) emotion or hopes—this attitude of the new couple to the
thatched house seemed to match the more general new attitude to the land. The
land, for the new workers, was merely a thing to be worked. And with their
machines they worked it as though they intended to turn all the irregularities
of nature into straight lines or graded curves.

One day I saw a heavy, wide roller being pulled by a tractor through a field of
young grass, already fairly tall though, and succulent-looking. The roller
appeared to be breaking the stalks of the grass and creating, as if spectrally,
the effect of a striped, two-toned lawn. What was the point of that? The young
man I asked seemed bemused. Perhaps he hadn’t understood what I had said. He
mumbled something which I couldn’t understand—all his style breaking down at
this moment of speech (and making me think back to the strangled speech, like
gruff throat noises, of Jack’s father-in-law: “Dogs? Dogs. Worry pheasants”).
Even when what the young man said was made clear to me, it didn’t make sense.
The stalks were being crushed, he said, to encourage stronger growth.

Another man said, on another day, that the point of the roller was to press down
the “Wiltshire flints” into the ground, so that when the time came the grass
could be cut without damage to the cutting machine. “One Wiltshire flint,” he
said—and the flints of Wiltshire and of the downs of my daily walk were given an
importance and malignity I had never attached to them—“could do thousands of
pounds’ worth of damage to one of these machines.”

One new machine in particular I noticed. It made great rolls out of hay, great
Swiss rolls of hay, as it were. These rolls, too big to be lifted or unrolled by
a man, were manhandled by another impressive machine, a machine with iron
grapples like giant scorpion’s tails. A store of these rolls—in two layers, like
a store of hay against some epic winter—was established far from the old farm
buildings, in an unfenced, flint-rubbled valley off the droveway, just below the
hill with the larks and the barrows, and from the top of which you had a sudden,
near view of Stonehenge.

So there were three stores of hay at different places: the Swiss rolls here, the
golden rectangular-sided bales in the new hay shed at the edge of the old
farmyard, and the bales, also rectangular-sided, in the rotting hayrick halfway
down the straight stretch of the droveway. What was the point of the Swiss
rolls? Was there an advantage over the traditional bales? I never knew until
years later, when this section of my life was closed. The bales, tightly banded
by the baling machines, had to be broken into by hand and then spread out for
cattle. The big rolls had simply to be unrolled; a machine did the job in
minutes.

Such refinement! But perhaps the scale—for farming—was wrong. Perhaps time
should never be as valuable as that, day after day. Perhaps when routines became
as tight as that, they could too easily go awry. One broken link—and human
ventures were always liable to error—could throw the entire operation out of
true.

Everything the new farm did was big. A very big silage pit was excavated at the
bottom of the hill just across the lane from the windbreak, and not far from the
cottages. There was only one old-fashioned aspect to that silage pit. It was
covered by black plastic sheeting, and the things used to keep the plastic
sheeting tight and in place were the things that in my experience had always
been used for that purpose: old tires. They were bought in enormous numbers.
Scores and scores of them must have been used; and scores and scores of them
were about at the bottom of the valley, in the droveway, just across from what
used to be Jack’s goose ground.

Those tires, and the deep new silage pit with its braced-up wall of timber
planks, and the banks of rubble from the digging for the pit, and the dark-brown
silage additive trickling out at the bottom, gave a touch of the rubbish tip to
that part of the droveway where, when Jack lived, geese and ducks wandered
about.

With the old farm workers the first caution with strangers, the sizing up, was
followed by a dumb friendliness, the country sociableness of people who spent
hours alone in the fields in their tractors. The new workers, who were like city
people in the country, city people in a larger workplace, didn’t have that kind
of friendliness. They hadn’t come to the valley to stay. They saw themselves as
people with a new kind of job and skill; they were almost migrant agricultural
workers; they were people on the move. Quite a few came and went.

I never got a smile from any of the people who moved into Jack’s house after
Jack’s wife had left. She had said of the first lot of her new neighbors that
they were “snobbish” people, who were interested in lawns and horses rather than
old-fashioned cottage gardens. After some comings and goings, people who fitted
that description settled in Jack’s cottage.

His greenhouse, the one bought as it seemed from a catalog and once green with
hanging plants, was empty, its glass murky with dust and rain, its timber frame
weathered. One day it was taken down, revealing the concrete foundation or
floor. The elaborate garden, with all its time-eating chores, was flattened.
What was left didn’t need much attention. No bedding out plants now; no forking
over of the ground below the hawthorn tree; no delphiniums in the summer. The
garden was flattened, all but two or three rose bushes and two or three apple
trees which Jack had pruned in such a way that they bunched out at the top from
a thick straight trunk. And the ground was grassed over. The hedge, once tight
at the top, mud-spattered and ragged at the bottom, a half or quarter barrier
between garden and rutted farm road, the hedge began to grow out into trees.

Now more than ever the cottages appeared to have neither front nor back, and to
stand in a kind of waste ground. It matched the people and their attitude to the
place. It matched the new way of farming, logic taken to extremes, the earth
stripped finally of its sanctity—the way the pink thatched cottage on the public
road, once pretty with its rose hedge, had been stripped of its atmosphere of
home by the people who looked to it only for shelter.

But that might have been only my way of looking. I had known—for a short
time—the straight stretch of the droveway open and unfenced. It had been fenced
down the middle in my first year and had remained fenced; but I carried that
earlier picture. I had arrived at my feeling for the seasons by looking at
Jack’s garden, adding events on the river and the manor riverbank to what I saw
in his garden. But there were other ways of looking. Jack himself, giving the
attention he gave to a meaningless hedge—a hedge that ran down the length of his
garden and then abruptly stopped—saw something else, certainly.

And perhaps the young children of the new people in Jack’s cottage saw
differently. They went to a junior school in Salisbury. The afternoon bus,
bringing them back, set them down on the public road; their mother picked them
up in her car. Often on my afternoon walk I had to stand aside on the paved lane
to allow the mother’s car to pass. She never acknowledged my stepping aside; she
behaved as though the lane were a public road and her car had the right of way.
And I also never took in or properly noticed what she was like. Her personality
was expressed for me only in the color and shape of her car, speeding up or down
the hill, going to get her children, or coming back with them.

I doubt whether any children in those farm cottages had been met like that off
the school bus. What pictures of their time at the bottom of the valley—brief
though that time was to be—would remain for them! What immense views, what a
memory of emptiness, down the vast droveway and over the flinty slopes of the
downs!

At the foot of the paved lane down the hill, across from the silage pit, there
was a narrow, little-used track, overgrown, hardly showing as a track, that ran
along a dip in the downs to a small abandoned farm building, weathered, not very
noticeable, something perhaps from the last century. In that lane one Saturday
afternoon, when they were free from school and the bus, I saw the children from
Jack’s old cottage playing. Like prehistorical children, in a great solitude.
But they were among the leftover tires of the silage pit (certain ones had been
turned into their toys, their pretend paddling rafts); and the whitening banks
and mounds of excavated rubble sprouting scattered weeds, pale green with bright
yellow flowers; and concrete blocks left over from the building.

I heard the sound behind the trees; saw the smoke and, between the black of the
tree trunks, the flames in the field beyond, the heat waves distorting the view
like a pane of old-fashioned glass; felt the heat; and then very quickly was
engulfed by the noise, rising fast to an amazing crepitation. And I thought of
another sound I had heard more than twenty-five years before in the highlands of
northeastern South America: the sound of a big waterfall. Water, fire—in great
disturbance they made the same sound. And fleetingly to me, walking on the downs
in that overpowering noise, it seemed that all matter was one.

On the way back—the fire quickly burnt away, finished, ashes in the field behind
the wood—on the way back from my walk, then and afterwards, the thick patch of
moss below the dormer window on the thatched roof of the empty house, a green
that was shining, unnatural, that green, once part of the beauty of thatch,
seemed to stand for more than vegetable matter.

So quiet the thatched house now; so ruined the little garden once neat with its
hedge, scores of small roses in the summer.

And so quiet, over the hill on the other side, at the bottom of the valley,
where an old, grassed-over field track led to a small abandoned farm building,
all black and rust in a little dip in the land, so quiet when I saw them on a
Saturday or Sunday afternoon, in the silence of the empty downs: the children
from what had been Jack’s cottage, playing amid the rubble (whitening, sprouting
a few weeds with yellow flowers) and the tires of the silage pit.

And there, perhaps, Jack’s vision of the valley as a whole place would continue;
a vision without the decadence that was in my eye; a vision of childhood that
would expand in the adult mind.

There were others who saw the valley and droveway as a place without decay.
Walking one day past the old farm buildings, past the fresh litter below the
birch trees, the fire in the chalk pit, turning up towards the new wood, I saw a
figure in the distance.

I was used to solitude on the walk. The sight of a person in the distance like
this, with the prospect of an encounter ten or fifteen minutes ahead, could
spoil all the intervening walk and the walk back as well (because the person
encountered would be likely to be walking back himself, usually to a parked car
at the far end of the droveway, where it met one of the highways). I preferred
therefore, if I saw a person approaching, to give up the walk and turn back.

This time, however, I didn’t. The person I was walking towards turned out to be
a middle-aged woman. She was quite small. In the distance, and especially when
seen against the sky, she had seemed physically imposing; people stood out in
the emptiness. Her greeting just before we crossed was easy, open; we stopped
and spoke. She was a working woman from Shrewton. When she lived at Amesbury,
she said, she had regularly done the walk we were both now doing. She had come
out now to look for the deer. So we had that in common as well. She said she had
worked out the circuit of the deer; she knew roughly where they crossed the
public road. And it was extraordinary, the survival of the family of deer in a
piece of land bounded on three sides by busy highways and on one of those sides
in addition by the army firing ranges.

No decay in that woman’s eye. Downs, walks, deer: the wonder of the natural
world as available as it had always been.

And no decay in the eye of the old farm manager either. I saw him one day on a
horse on the rising stretch of the droveway between the wood on one side and a
treeless field or pasture on the other, before the hill with the larks and the
barrows on the brow of the hill. In the old days he had seldom come so far on
his inspection tours in his Land-Rover. But now he was retired and could roam;
and he was on a horse, a further sign of leisure.

It was a big horse, of a beautiful color, white or gray spotted or spattered
with red-brown. It was a difficult horse, he said. It was the gift of his
daughter, who had married and gone to live in Gloucestershire. And that was what
his talk was about: his daughter (so good with horses) and her gift of the horse
(no trouble to her, that animal).

His suburban house at the very edge of the antique droveway; his neat garden;
his daughter grown up and gone away; and now the empty days. How quickly his
time had passed! How quickly a man’s time passed! So quickly, in fact, that it
was possible within a normal span to witness, to comprehend, two or three active
life cycles in succession.

I would have liked to hear the old manager say something about the new farm
people. I would have then said—more in tribute to him as someone from my past,
than because I understood what I saw of the farming around me—how much I
preferred his way. But he wasn’t interested. So the solidarity went unexpressed.
And it was just as well. Because eventually, mysteriously (at least to me), the
new venture failed, after two harsh, dry summers, summers so harsh that the old
mock orange shrub outside my cottage died.

During one of those droughts I heard talk—on the bus, and from Bray, the
car-hire man—that water wasn’t to be brought to the cattle, but that the cattle
were to be transported to where there was water, transported perhaps to Wales!
Such was the scale and style and reputation of the new venture. I don’t know
whether anything like that happened, or whether it was just excited local
exaggeration. Soon, however, it didn’t matter. The venture failed. And even this
failure—large as it was, affecting so many people, affecting the eventual
appearance of so many acres—seemed to happen quietly.

It was some time before I knew that there had been failure. The machines were
there; the cows were there; the men were up and down in their cars; the big
trucks came to take away the grain from the metal-walled barn. But then
gradually the failure, the withdrawal at the center, began to show.

The prefabricated cow shed next to the barn was opened, front and back, and
cleared of its dung and straw; and it remained open and clean (though stained)
and empty: the stalls, the concrete floor with its canals, the slatted timber of
the walls striping the sunlight, radiating it at many angles, and giving the
shed an internal glow. The new milking building or parlor was taken down. So
newly put up, its concrete platform—all that remained—still so new and
raw-looking on the hillside. It was like Jack’s greenhouse; that, too, had left
only a concrete floor.

Again, here, building had been on too big a scale, a scale too big for men.
Needs had been exaggerated, had ramified, and had left a ruin. An empty cow shed
that might eventually be taken down and sold elsewhere; a milking machine that
no doubt had already been sold, leaving only a concrete floor. So small in the
openness now, that floor, where the milking machines had hummed and hissed and
dials had kept check of this and that; while the dung-stained cows, corralled
into their iron-railed passages at particular times, had waited with a curious
stillness to give milk to the machines, after being walked up the hill to the
cowman’s shouts (the only human remnant of the milking ritual).

The cows themselves eventually disappeared. Some would have been sold; but
whether sold or not, what would have happened to them would have been what
always happened to cows when their time was judged to have come: batches of them
were regularly taken off in covered vans to the slaughterhouse.

I had seen the cows on the hillsides against the sky, heads down, grazing, or
looking with timorous interest at the passing man. And they had seemed like the
cows in the drawing on the label of the condensed-milk tins I knew in Trinidad
as a child: something to me as a result at the very heart of romance, a child’s
fantasy of the beautiful other place, something which, when I saw it on the
downs, was like something I had always known. I had seen the big eyes, the
occasional mild stampede of the herd as, within their pasture, they had followed
the walking man, thinking he had brought them something tasty or was to lead
them to something they had been trained to like. I had seen the big, wet, black
noses, the fly-repellent in the metal sachets clipped to the ears, which they
flapped like heavy fans. One sees what one sees. Harder to imagine, unreal, what
one doesn’t see.

It had taken me some time to see that though milk came from cows that had
dropped calves, no calf was to be seen, except very sick ones: little, seemingly
fluid sacks of black and white or brown and white on straw, creatures still
seeming fresh from the womb. And no cow with its calf. No lowing herd winding
o’er the lea here, as in Gray’s “Elegy”; no “sober” herd lowing to meet their
young at evening’s close, as in “The Deserted Village.”

Pictures of especial beauty at one time, those lines of poetry, matching the
idea of the cows on the condensed-milk label. Especial beauty, because (though I
knew that “sober” well—lovely, apt word—and knew the ritual of bedding down
cattle for the night) we had no herds like that on my island. We didn’t have the
climate, the pasture; the island had been developed for the cultivation of
sugarcane. But there were cattle. Some members of my family, like other country
people, kept cows, one or two, for milk, for love, for religion.

We were at the very end of the old Aryan cow worship, the worship of the cow
that gave milk, without which men’s life would have been harder and in some
climates and lands impossible. This worship was something our grandfathers had
brought with them from peasant India; when I was a child, we still honored the
idea for its own sake, as well as for its link with the immemorial past. Among
us, the new milk from a cow that had just calved was almost holy. A special
sweet was made from this very rich milk and sent by the cow’s owner to friends
and relations, sent in very small portions, like a consecrated offering from a
religious rite.

Our few cows (perhaps like Gray’s or Goldsmith’s herds) were poor things
compared with the healthy, big animals on the downs. But these animals on the
downs, even with their beauty, were without the sanctity, the constant attention
of men, which as a child I thought cows craved. These cows in railed pastures or
meadows had numbers scored into their rumps. No sanctity at birth, and none at
death; just the covered van. And sometimes, as once in the derelict, mossy yard
at the back of Jack’s cottage, there were reminders of assisted insemination or
gestation going wrong: when for some days, isolated from the animals that had
all come out well, oddly made cattle were penned up there, with that extra bit
of flesh and hair (with the black and white Frisian pattern) hanging down their
middle, as of cow material that had leaked through the two halves of the cow
mold.

And now, with the disappearance of the cattle, there came to the old and new
lanes and ways of the downs around the farm (whose life might have seemed to the
visitor unchanging and ritualized) a moment of stasis, suspense. There had been
great activity; now there were more ruins than ever.

The manor in whose grounds I lived, so many of its rooms shut up; the gardens of
the manor, the forested orchard; the children’s house there, with the conical
thatched roof, the thatch rotting, the thick stack of the damp reeds slipping
out of the wire netting in one place, creating the effect at the bottom of a
diagonal slicing of the reeds; the squash court that was not squash court or
farmhouse; the old granary with the double pyramidal roof.

Beyond the renovated church, the old farm buildings had been taken down and
replaced by the prefabricated shed, which was now empty; with the round convex
silver mirrors at the entrance to the cow yard as reminders of the traffic that
had once been. The pink house with the green-stained thatched roof and the
shredding straw pheasant on the roof; its garden now a piece of waste ground.
The new barn and the new half-slatted cow shed at the top of the hill with the
windbreak of pine and beech, trees which had grown so much since I had first
seen them. At the bottom of that hill, the silage pit with the thick
timber-plank walls against the excavated hillside, the timber planks stained
with creosote; the tires all around, bought in such number from people who dealt
in such things, tires worn smooth from many miles on many roads; and the rubble
of the excavation, hummocked and chalky white and full of grass and weeds.

And these were set among older ruins. The small old farm building, perhaps from
the last century, far to the right at the end of the overgrown track at the foot
of the hill; and all the many farm buildings, old or very old, at the back of
Jack’s cottage. Along the droveway: the beehives; the house-shaped old rick; the
old stone house, ruined walls alone, surrounded by trees which, tall and
overhanging the ruin when I had first seen them, were now ten years older:
vegetable nature moving on, stone immovable.

And in the walk in the other direction, away from the old Land-Rover run of the
old manager: the great Swiss rolls of hay still stacked in the space between the
wood—how grown!—and the hill of larks, with the ancient barrows at the top, part
of the pimpling of the downs as seen against the sky: those rolls of hay now as
black and as earthlike as the older bales that, at the other end of the
droveway, had indeed, below their tattered plastic sheeting, turned to earth.
Grass to hay to earth.

My own time here was coming to an end, my time in the manor cottage and in that
particular part of the valley, my second childhood of seeing and learning, my
second life, so far away from my first.

I had tried almost from the beginning to make myself ready for this end. After
the glory and surprise of the first spring on the riverbanks—the new reeds, the
water clearing to crystal (“freshing out,” as I learned to say), but this water
green and dark with olive-blue suggestions and with illusory depth where it
reflected the thick, succulent growth on the banks, and especially below
trees—after that first spring I would say: “At least I had a spring here.” And
then I said: “At least I had a spring and summer here.” And: “At least I’ve had
a year here.” And so it went on, as the years passed. Until time began to
telescope, and experience itself began to change: the new season not truly new
any more, bringing less of new experience than reminders of the old. One had
begun to stack away the years, to count them, to take pleasure in the counting,
accumulation.

One autumn afternoon I had a slight choking fit as I walked past Jack’s old
cottage and the derelict old farmyard. The fit passed by the time I had got
round the corner, cleared the farmyard, and left behind the old metal and
tangled wire and timber junk below the beeches. (Not the birches near the fire
pit; they were on the other side of the way. These beeches were at the edge of
the farmyard, big trees now in their prime, their lowest branches very low,
providing a wonderful, rich, enclosing shade in the summer that made me think of
George Borrow and his wanderings in The Romany Rye and Lavengro.) Past the
beeches and the farm, in the familiar solitude of the grassy way, I began to
breathe easily again. Some irritation, something in the air around the farmyard,
some passing allergy, I thought, and did nothing about it when I went home. That
evening the fit returned. It was like a continuation of the moment near Jack’s
cottage; but this time it stayed with me, and within two or three hours I was
seriously ill.

This was the illness that did away with whatever remained of youthfulness in me
(and much had remained), diminished my energy, and pushed me week by week,
during my convalescence, month by month, into middle age.

It was the end, for me, of the manor cottage as well. The downs, the uplands,
the river and its banks—the geography here was simple. Water drained off the
downs to the river. After rain, on the paved lane beside the windbreak, there
were the little pebbled rivulets I had minutely observed running between the
asphalt edge and the grass verge, down to the public road and then, over the
road surface or through culverts, towards the river. Little rivulets like that,
but charged with beech mast, now fresh, now old, ran past my kitchen door after
rain; and left little tide wracks, almost, of beech-mast debris all down the
path. My cottage was cold. The solid stone and flint walls which I loved—for the
warm color of the stone especially—kept in this cold. The beech trees that
embowered it also kept out the sun. Even in summer it never got warm; even
during the summer drought that killed the old mock orange shrub I needed heat at
night.

The beauty of the place, the great love I had grown to feel for it, greater than
for any other place I had known, had kept me there too long. My health had
suffered. But I couldn’t say then, and can’t say now, that I minded. There is
some kind of exchange always. For me, for the writer’s gift and freedom, the
labor and disappointments of the writing life, and the being away from my home;
for that loss, for having no place of my own, this gift of the second life in
Wiltshire, the second, happier childhood as it were, the second arrival (but
with an adult’s perception) at a knowledge of natural things, together with the
fulfillment of the child’s dream of the safe house in the wood. But there was
the cold of the cottage, and the damp and mist of the glorious riverbank; and
the illnesses that come to people who have developed or inherited weak lungs.

It was some time before I went walking again. I was working on a big book. At a
certain stage in that kind of labor, energy becomes one: mental energy, physical
energy, the use of one depleting the other. And when I was sufficiently
recovered, most of my energy went on my book.

I was also, sadly, preparing to leave. Just a few miles away, on a dry down, I
was converting two derelict agricultural cottages into a house. The cottages had
been built eighty years or so before on the site of an old agricultural hamlet
with a very old name. The old hamlet had disappeared; nothing remained of it
except a few level areas, little green platforms or terraces, close to one
another, in certain meadows. During my own building work, old brick walls and
brick foundations from the last century and the black earth of old latrines were
dug up where—with smooth green slopes all around—I had been expecting only
chalk.

The walls and foundations of workers’ houses: generations of agricultural
workers had lived on the site. And even in the pair of cottages I was
renovating, the cottages that had been built early in the century over the
foundations and debris of the old hamlet, many generations of workers, or many
different people, had lived. Now I, an outsider, was altering the appearance of
the land a little, doing what I had been aware of others doing, creating a
potential ruin.

(And later, after I had moved there, when old people came to look at the
cottages where they had lived or visited, I felt ashamed. And once—when a very
old lady, not far from death, was brought by her grandson to look at the cottage
where as a girl she had lived for a summer with her shepherd grandfather, and
was so bewildered by the changed cottage she found that she thought she had come
to the wrong place—once I pretended I didn’t live there.)

I should have made a clean break, gone elsewhere. But having cut myself off from
my first life, and having had, unexpectedly, and twenty years after that earlier
casting off, the good fortune to have found a second life, I was unwilling to
move too far. I wanted to stay with what I had found. I wanted to recreate, so
far as it was possible, what I had found in the manor cottage.

One day, perhaps nine or ten months after I had fallen ill, I went on my old
walk. New associations now, to add to the old. And, as if to match my mood, I
saw, almost as soon as I began to go down the hill beside the windbreak, a
greater change at the bottom of the valley than any I had known.

What had been the row of three farm cottages, one of which had been Jack’s, was
being converted into one big house. The basic work had been done. The three
cottages, or so it appeared from the outside, had been turned into a large
living room; new spaces or rooms had been added to this big central room. The
roof of the house was being put on: new, red-blond rafters. The design of the
house was not elegant. But it was going to be roomy and comfortable; and every
window would give a staggering green view, of the droveway, or the slopes of the
downs, the woods of birch and beech, or the lines of blackthorn and hawthorn
along the lateral field lanes.

Most of the old farm buildings had gone. But some at the back were still there,
among them the old barn with the high loading window and the projecting metal
bracket where a pulley and cable would once have helped to lift sacks or bales
from loaded wagons and swing them into place inside.

The builders were working on the roof, hanging slates fast. The van with the
builder’s name was on the droveway, where once Jack’s geese had roamed. There
was a radio playing loudly somewhere in the unfinished, hollow, reverberating
building. The builders, town people, were more unwelcoming than the town farm
workers had been.

How exposed a house looks when it becomes a site for builders, how stripped of
sanctity, when a room, once intimate, becomes mere space! Jack’s cottage (whose
interior I had never seen until now) had been reduced—without side wall or
middle flooring—to pure builder’s space, and at this stage of building was still
pure space, like the space within the ruined stone-walled house with the big
sycamores further along the droveway. Somewhere in that space Jack had made his
bravest decision, to leave his deathbed for the last Christmas season with his
friends, in the so ordinary public house not far from the end of the droveway.
And that was the space to which—with what illness, delirium, resignation, or
perhaps reconciliation—he had returned to die.

I saw this new building going up in summer, in white chalk dust. But in winter,
as I knew, the site had been one of mud and water, settling at the bottom of the
valley, mud and water many inches deep. That was the source of the damp that had
given Jack his bronchitis and his pneumonia. But now that wet and damp had been
dealt with. All the ground that had been Jack’s garden and goose ground, and the
gardens or grassed-over areas of the other cottages, all that had been concreted
over, to create a forecourt for the big house.

At the back, the concrete floor of Jack’s greenhouse was not to be seen; the
area had been incorporated into the new living space of the big house.

So at last, just as the house was cleansed of Jack’s life and death, so the
ground he had tended finally disappeared. But surely below all that concrete
over his garden some seed, some root, would survive; and one day perhaps, when
the concrete was taken up (as surely one day it would be taken up, since few
dwelling places are eternal), one day perhaps some memory of Jack, preserved in
some shrub or flower or vine, would come to life again.

With that building of a big house where once, perhaps for centuries, had stood
the cottages or dwellings of farm or country laborers, a cycle had been
completed.

Once there would have been many hamlets, settlements of farm workers and
shepherds, near the fording places along the river. These hamlets had dwindled;
they had dwindled fast with the coming of machinery. Fewer hands had been
needed; and then, when sheep stopped being kept, even shepherds were not needed.

The garden of the manor, the forested orchard, lay partly on the site of one
vanished hamlet. Such building-over would have occurred many times before. The
duplicate name of the hamlet or village, Waldenshaw—the same word (for forest or
wood) in two tribal languages, both long since absorbed into other languages—the
very name spoke of invaders from across the sea and of ancient wars and
dispossessions here, along the picturesque river and the wet meadows.

This history had repeated, had radiated outwards, as it were: much of the wealth
for the Victorian-Edwardian manor, its gardens and ancillary buildings, had come
from the empire, ventures abroad. Once the manor estate had covered many of the
acres of my afternoon walks. But its glory had lasted one generation. The family
had moved elsewhere; the estate had become the manor and grounds alone; it had
shed its farms and land. Others had taken over those acres, built new big houses
in villages or on the sites of hamlets once full of working people. And now the
last of the peasant or farm cottages along the droveway had been taken over.
What had once been judged a situation suitable only for agricultural
cottages—next to a farm, far from roads and services—had become desirable. The
farm had gone; the very distance from the public road was a blessing. And so,
the quality or attributes of the site changing, the past had been abolished.

I had lived, very soon after coming to the valley, with the idea of change, of
the imminent dissolution of the perfection I had found. It had given a poignancy
to the beauty I had experienced, the passing of the seasons. I had promised
myself again and again, every spring, every autumn, to get a camera (or at least
to relearn how to use the one I owned) to record the droveway and the ruined
house below the sycamores and the gypsy caravan and the farm buildings and
Jack’s cottage and garden and goose ground. But I had never once taken a camera
on my walks; and perhaps because I had no physical record of these things, they
had an added poignancy, since they very soon began to exist only in my head.

I had thought that because of my insecure past—peasant India, colonial Trinidad,
my own family circumstances, the colonial smallness that didn’t consort with the
grandeur of my ambition, my uprooting of myself for a writing career, my coming
to England with so little, and the very little I still had to fall back on—I had
thought that because of this I had been given an especially tender or raw sense
of an unaccommodating world.

My time was over in the valley, that particular, rhythmical time of manor
cottage and grounds and the special signs there of the seasons, and walks on the
downs and the riverbank. And I felt like that—that the second life I had been
granted had ended—though I did not move far. The cottages I had been renovating
were on the same bus route, the bus that made fewer trips, with fewer
passengers, for more and more money.

One day a middle-aged woman spoke to me. Some of the people on the bus spoke to
me; some, even after twelve years, never did. I did not recognize the woman who
spoke to me.
