Blackstone is a predominantly residential neighborhood in Providence, Rhode
Island. It is in the northeast corner of the city and is bounded to the south
and west by Lloyd Avenue and Hope Street respectively. It is one of six
neighborhoods comprising the East Side of Providence.

Blackstone is one of the newest parts of Providence, as the remoteness of its
location and marshy land had precluded significant development before the late
19th century. The area's connection to the rest of the city improved when a
second public horse car line was completed, though it was the completion of the
landscaped Blackstone Boulevard in 1894 that triggered rapid development in the
area. The 20th century saw institutional development in the form of Central
Baptist Church, Temple Emanuel, and St. Sebastian's Roman Catholic Church.
According to the Providence Plan,a local nonprofit aimed at improving city life,
92.5% of residents are white, well above the city-wide average of 54.5%.

Blackstone is one of the most affluent neighborhoods in the city with a median
family income nearly four times that of the city and housing values more than
doubling in recent years. The median household income is $87,727, and the median
family income is $117,522. Only 1.1% of families live below the poverty line.

Blackstone Boulevard Park is a green space between northbound and southbound
lanes of Blackstone Boulevard. It consists of 19.3 acres of parkland and a
1.7-mile jogging/walking path.

Lippitt Memorial Park is located at the intersection of Hope Street and
Blackstone Boulevard near the Pawtucket border.

Butler Hospital, located off Blackstone Boulevard, is Rhode Island's only
private mental health hospital. Founded in 1844, the hospital offers psychiatric
and substance-abuse treatment programs.

Charles is a neighborhood in northern Providence, Rhode Island. Along with
Wanskuck, it comprises what is sometimes referred to as the North End. To the
west Charles is partitioned from Wanskuck by Route 146, while the Chad Brown
public housing complex separates Charles from Smith Hill to the south, and the
West River and Interstate 95 bounds the area to the east. The city limits
abutting the city of North Providence bound Charles to the north.

Until Wanskuck Road (now Branch Avenue) was completed in 1706, Charles's lack of
connections to the more developed part of Providence kept the area sparsely
populated. In 1765, the isolated North End (of which Charles is a part) was
annexed to the neighboring town of North Providence. By the 19th century, the
improvement in infrastructure and proximity to the West River caused
corporations such as the Silver Spring Bleaching and Dyeing Company to move to
the area. With the new industry came an influx of immigrants and an increase in
demand for housing stock. By the end of the century the neighborhood was filled
with one and two family homes of Irish, English, German, Scottish, and Italian
immigrant families, with the largest presence found of the latter. This rapid
growth and development were among the factors that lead North Providence to
return the North End to Providence in 1874.

The neighborhood's connection to the rest of Providence improved further with
streetcar service in 1895. By the 1930s, Charles was densely settled by the
working and middle class. In the latter half of the 20th century, much industry
declined and withdrew from the region, though the effects have been somewhat
mitigated by Providence's attempts to market part of the area as an industrial
park.

For the most part, Charles remains a primarily residential and commercial
neighborhood. Homeownership, unemployment, and income levels remain steady and
the neighborhood remains predominantly white with 52.7% of occupants claiming
Italian ancestry. 16% of residents are Hispanic and 8% are African-American. One
in three children under the age of six speaks a language other than English as
their primary language. The median family income is $36,966, above the city-wide
average of $32,058. 16% of households live in poverty and 7% of households
receive some form of public assistance.

Downtown, also known as Downcity, is the central economic, political, and
cultural district of the city of Providence, Rhode Island. It is bounded on the
east by Canal Street and the Providence River, to the north by Smith Street, to
the west by Interstate 95, and to the south by Henderson Street. I-95 serves as
a physical barrier between the city's commercial core and neighborhoods of
Federal Hill, West End, and Upper South Providence. Most of the downtown is
listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the Downtown Providence
Historic District.

Elmhurst is a primarily residential neighborhood in the northwest quadrant of
Providence, Rhode Island. Douglas Avenue and Admiral Street bound Elmhurst to
the northeast, Academy Avenue and Smith Street bound it to the west, while
Chalkstone Avenue marks the southern border.

In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Elmhurst was mostly large tracts of
land used for farming. Streets constructed along present-day Douglas Ave, Eaton
Street, and Chalkstone Avenue allowed for transit of produce to the city. The
neighborhood remained sparsely settled for most of the nineteenth century. A
streetcar line connecting Elmhurst to the city was opened in 1882. In 1909, the
city acquired a piece of land on either side of a stream flowing from Academy
Avenue, parallel to Chalkstone, and created Pleasant Valley Parkway, a
landscaped boulevard similar in design to Blackstone Boulevard in the Blackstone
neighborhood of Providence, though the residents attracted to the area were not
as wealthy as their Blackstone counterparts.[1] In the early 1900s, Irish and
Italian immigrants making their way out of crowded closer neighborhoods
displaced the initial middle and upperclass residents. Institutional growth came
over the next few decades in the form of the founding of the Charles V. Chapin
Hospital, the Providence Lying-In Hospital (now Women and Infants Hospital) â€“
the first Women's Maternity Services facility in the region, and the Homeopathic
Hospital of Rhode Island (now Roger Williams Medical Center). Providence College
and La Salle Academy moved to the area in 1917 and 1925 respectively.[1]
Following World War II, Elmhurst saw growth of a suburban character as it was
one of the few areas in Providence with undeveloped land. Most of these houses
were built in the northwestern part of the neighborhood.

Elmwood is a neighborhood in the South Side of Providence, Rhode Island. The
triangular region is demarcated by Broad Street, Elmwood Avenue, and Interstate
95.

Prior to the 1850s, the region had been used primarily as farm land. Then, in
the late 18th and early 19th centuries, as the city began to expand south and
west with the development of manufacturing and shipping interests, the area
began to develop. In the 1840s through 1860s, as the city of Providence expanded
from a population of 23,000 to past 50,000, development crept southwestward
along Broad Street. As areas began to be densely populated, the remaining farms
were subdivided. The neighborhood takes its name from one of its principal
developers, Joseph J. Cooke, who in 1843 purchased a large tract of farm land
and named the estate "Elmwood". He and other developers sought to build a model
suburban community with wide streets and shade-giving elm trees.[2] As public
transportation improved from omnibuses (horse-drawn carriages) to horse-drawn
tracked cars, and finally to electrified streetcars, development began to
quicken pace. A number of manufacturers moved to Elmwood, while the area near
Public St, Elmwood Ave, and Potters Ave began to develop as a middle to upper
class residential neighborhood. As the automobile came to increase in
popularity, businesses in the form of car dealerships, garages, and service
stations would proliferate along Elmwood Avenue. As trolley service was
bustituted, Elmwood Ave was widened significantly and the elm trees Cooke
planted had to be removed. These changes in streetscape change the character of
the neighborhood irrevocably. When the 1950s came, Interstate 95 was
constructed, and many single-family homes were converted into apartments.
Combined with the aging housing stock and traffic congestion, the neighborhood
became less appealing to the middle-class, who left in large numbers during this
time. In the early and mid 1970s, spot demolition on dilapidated houses became
common and Elmwood fell into disrepair, though in recent years, there have been
many efforts to restore many older mansion and revitalize the neighborhood. In
1980, two large, predominantly residential areas of Elmwood were added to the
National Register of Historic Places as the Elmwood Historic District, with
emphasis on their nineteenth century revival and Victorian houses. Restoration
efforts in Elmwood were featured on 'Season 11 of Bob Vilia's Home Again' when
he helps 11 neighbors with various projects over the course of 13 episodes
highlighting the historic nature of homes in the neighborhood.

The Federal Hill neighborhood has a salient role in the history of Providence
due to its central location within the city. This part of Providence is best
known for its Italian American community and abundance of restaurants.

Federal Hill is bounded by Westminster Street to the south, Route 6 and Route 10
to the west and north, and Interstate 95 to the east. The area borders Downtown
to the east, Smith Hill and Valley to the north, Olneyville to the west, and the
West End and South Providence to the south.

Gateway arch over Atwells Avenue. La Pigna sculpture, a traditional symbol of
welcome, abundance and quality, hangs from the center.

Detail of La Pigna sculpture on Atwells Avenue gateway arch. Atwells Avenue is
the cultural centerpiece of the neighborhood, with many famous restaurants
densely clustered along it between Interstate 95 and Harris Avenue. It also
contains a mix of other typical urban businesses such as sandwich and pizza
shops, convenience stores, a hotel, and tattoo parlors. The gateway arch over
Atwells Avenue near Downtown is one of the most recognizable landmarks in
Providence. The La Pigna (or The Pine Cone) sculpture hanging from its center â€”
a traditional Italian symbol of welcome, abundance, and quality â€” is often
mistakenly referred to as "The Pineapple" and has become the symbol of Federal
Hill. Other important streets in the neighborhood include Broadway, home
primarily to professional, medical and legal offices, but also to the historic
Columbus Theater now used for movies and live performances. Other than a
commercial and warehouse section in the area of Dean and Washington Streets,
most of the rest of the neighborhood is residential, often catering to college
students. Johnson and Wales University maintains the Renaissance Hall dormitory
on Federal Hill as well. Most cross streets in the historic neighborhood between
Atwells Avenue and Broadway are one-way due to their narrowness. A few streets
remain paved with cobblestone.

Federal Hill received its name after a 1788 Fourth of July ox roast celebration
on the plain adjacent to the hill. The organizers of the celebration intended to
celebrate the ratification of the Federal Constitution by the 9 of the 13 states
needed to create the United States. Because anti-federalist sentiment was strong
in Rhode Island, General William West led 1,000 armed farmers to Providence to
stop the celebration. Eventually, a compromise was reached and the celebrants
agreed to celebrate Independence Day only and not the ratification of the
Federal Constitution.[1] The issue remained hotly controversial in Rhode Island
for two more years until the state finally became the last of the original
thirteen states to join the union. The area of Federal Hill was originally
called Nocabulabet, believed to be an anglicized version of either a
Narragansett or Wampanoag phrase meaning "land above the river" or "land between
the ancient waters."[2] Federal Hill's Atwells Avenue is named for Amos Maine
Atwell, who led a syndicate of businessmen developing the western areas of the
city in 1788. The area developed into a working class area during the early 19th
century in part due to reverses in commercial shipping.[3] In 1840, only the
lower streets of the hill were occupied, and that mostly by Irish immigrants who
worked in the nearby textile shops and foundries. Yet, by the early 1850s, the
part of Atwells Avenue that we think of today as "LIttle Italy" was clustered
with two and three story tenements that housed the large influx of those who
fled the famine of 1845 to 1851. A third of these people came from the Barony of
Truagh and surrounding townlands. This area, encompassing Northern County
Monaghan and Southern County Tyrone, had for centuries been the fiefdom of the
McKenna clan. Not incidentally, McKenna was, by far, the most common name on
Federal Hill in the 1860s. The 1870s saw the first arrival of immigrants from
southern Italy, with greater numbers arriving in the next two decades. By 1895,
the Hill was divided almost evenly between Irish and Italians. These were
tension-filled times, as both groups fought for jobs and respect from the Yankee
majority. More can be read about the Irish period on the Hill at
http://federalhillirish.com/. The first two decades of the 20th century
witnessed heavy Italian-American immigration into Federal Hill, making it the
city's informal Little Italy.[3] Though the area today is more diverse, Federal
Hill still retains its status as the traditional center for the city's
Italian-American community. Providence's annual Columbus Day parade marches down
Atwells Avenue. In 1954, Raymond Loreda Salvatore Patriarca, Sr made drastic
changes in the family, the biggest being moving the family's base of operations
to Providence, Rhode Island. He ran his family from the National Cigarette
Service Company and Coin-O-Matic Distributors, a vending machine and pinball
business on Atwells Avenue in the Federal Hill neighborhood of Providence.[4]
The business was known to family members as "The Office."

Fox Point is a neighborhood in the East Side of Providence, Rhode Island. It is
bounded by the Providence and Seekonk rivers, Interstate 195 and the College
Hill and Wayland neighborhoods. Fox Point is the southernmost neighborhood in
the East Side area of Providence. Fox Point retains much of its historical
character, with housing stock dating from the 18th and 19th centuries in much of
the neighborhood. Vernacular interpretations of the Federal, Greek revival, and
Italianate architectural styles are well represented West of Governor Street,
while somewhat more recent construction dominates on Ives and Gano Streets.

Originally used for farmland, Fox Point's economy quickly changed to maritime
affairs with the construction of Providence's first port at India Point in 1680,
becoming a major trading point in the Atlantic Triangular trade of slaves, sugar
cane and rum between New England, the West Indies, and West Africa. The
neighborhood derives its name from Tockwotten Hill, which was largely leveled
(along with slum residences) as part of a public works project in the 19th
century. The fill was used to reclaim part of the Seekonk River now consisting
of Gano Street and land to the east of Gano Street. Once the area's street grid
had been laid, Fox Point developed as a residential neighborhood. However, with
the completion of the Boston and Providence Rail Road, and regular steamship
connections to ports along the East Coast, Fox Point became an attractive
location for industry. New industry attracted many immigrants, first Irish,
though by the second half of the 19th century the neighborhood was home to
increasing numbers of Portuguese and Cape Verdeans. Many Portuguese-American
institutions remain in Fox Point, though the Portuguese community is much
smaller than it once was. The proximity of Brown University has led to a
combination of student housing and gentrification in the neighborhood that has
displaced many of the long-term residents.

Hartford is a neighborhood located along the western edge of Providence, Rhode
Island. Route 6 and the Woonasquatucket River separates it from Olneyville.

Prior to the arrival of white settlers, the area had been used as a soapstone
quarry by the Narragansett natives. The first white settlers were farmers.
Throughout the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, settlers built dwellings
intended for temporary stays, though later, attracted by the country atmosphere,
they adopted permanent residence. In the early nineteenth century, the proximity
of the Woonasquatucket River allowed the area to begin industrialization. In
1812 the Mill Merino became the second textile establishment in the general
area, producing a soft material called "merino cloth". Merino Village,
consisting of stone houses, a general store, and water supply, was built by the
company to support its workers. As the area began to develop further, its
economic opportunities attracted immigrants. Though initially primarily Irish,
later waves of immigration brought Polish and later Italian immigrants to the
neighborhood.[1] In the 1950s, massive housing projects altered the fabric of
Hartford. The construction of Route 6 meant the demolition of a swath of
working-class housing, while two large low-income housing projects (Hartford
Park Public Housing Project and Manton Heights Housing Projects) visually
demonstrated a shift in the neighborhood's demographics. As with much public
housing in the United States, both fell victim to neglect and vandalism, with
the demolition of a significant number of units occurring in the 1980s.[1]

Hope is a neighborhood on the northern border of Providence, Rhode Island. To
the west, it is bounded by North Main Street, the North Burial Ground, and
Interstate 95, while Rochambeau Ave, Hope Street, and the Providence-Pawtucket
city line roughly delineate its boundaries to the south, east, and north
respectively. Hope is sometimes referred to as Summit, named for the street that
runs through the middle of the neighborhood. Though "Hope" is officially
recognized, residents and the local neighborhood organization more often use
"Summit". The area that is now Hope was first settled in the seventeenth century
by farmers and tavernkeepers following present-day North Main Street out of the
center of Providence, establishing a strong rural community. Like many of
Providence's neighborhoods, Hope did not experience appreciable development
until the area was connected to downtown Providence by streetcar, happening in
1875. Large farming lots gave way to subdivision and the establishment of
single-family homes. In the 1920s, many of these were bought by a growing
community of Russian Jews who would have a strong presence in the area until
World War II. In 1945, Miriam Hospital relocated to Hope from its West End lot.
Having expanded four times since then and opening a new medical building in
1989, the hospital now occupies a full two city blocks, with a parking lot
filling out the third, now stretching from 5th Street to 8th Street. Today, a
community organization named the Summit Neighborhood Association publishes a
quarterly newspaper and encourages participation in neighborhoods activities. As
of 1990 Census, the neighborhood was home to 3464 individuals and was roughly
80% non-Hispanic white, 8.2% black, 4% Hispanic, 2% Asian or pacific islander
with the remaining 6% either reporting other or multiple races. Median household
income was $47,764, above the city-wide average of $26,867. Approximately 5% of
families were living below the poverty line, compared with 24% for the city as a
whole. About 40% of housing stock were single-family units, with the remaining
being duplex or multi-family units. The median price for a single-family house
was $247,500, nearly twice the city-wide average of $130,000. Owner-occupancy
has been steadily dropping, from 56% in 1980 to 48% in 1990.

The Lower South Side (or Lower South Providence) is a neighborhoods in southern
Providence, Rhode Island. It is bounded from Upper South Providence by Public
Street to the north, Interstate 95, to the south, and Broad Street, and the
Providence River to the west and east respectively. Though often associated
closely with Upper South Providence, they are differentiated by location and the
far more frequent occurrence in the latter of institutional buildings and space.

Originally the area that is now Lower South Providence was pasture land. The
area was ceded to the new town of Cranston in 1754 and would not rejoin
Providence until 1868. A streetcar added in 1865 ran west along Public Street,
and then south down Ocean Street, and would transform the Lower South Side into
Providence's first streetcar suburb. In the next ten years, the streets along
which the streetcar ran developed quickly. Between 1860 and 1880, as the
population of Providence doubled to 104,857, Irish immigrants, which had
hitherto been confined further north, began to populate the southern part of
Lower South Providence. Because the city of Cranston was traditionally
Republican, residents began to fear that a large immigrant population, which
overwhelmingly voted Democratic, would undermine its Republican political
affiliations. For this reason, Cranston ceded the Lower South Side (along with
Washington Park) back to Providence in 1868. While the Upper South Side
attracted industry for its proximity to downtown, the Lower South Side had
greater access to Narragansett Bay and freight lines via the Port of Providence.
Metal and jewelry factories appeared. Since factory owners and workers both
lived near work, these operations encourage class mixture, which is reflected in
the area's architectural stock. By the 1870s, fewer and grander single-family
houses appeared, and the majority of housing became rented duplexes, rented by
working class tenants. By 1900, the large amount of housing construction and
creation of new electrified rail lines, gave the area fast transportation and
ample affordable housing, and the Lower South Side thrived. Between 1900 and
1950, now second and third-generation immigrants moved into newer, more affluent
areas, with the increased prosperity they'd attained, depriving the region of
its middle class. In 1943, the Roger Williams Housing Project was created, and
though it was successful for the first 15 years, cuts in funding ultimately
resulted in the most of the project's buildings being demolished. After 1950,
the automobile sentenced the area to a long inexorable decline. The creation of
Interstate 95 under the Eisenhower Interstate System required demolition of
existing buildings and severed the region's historical connection to the
waterfront. Green space was lost as lots and yards were converted into driveways
and garages. Street renovation resulted in the loss of hitherto tree-lined
streetscapes. Tenants owning cars began to look further out for newer, more
prosperous neighborhoods. As absentee landlords carved up single-family
residences into multi-family dwellings, proper maintenance often neglected.
Speculative purchases in the 1980s led many landlords in debt, raising rent, and
further neglecting their properties.

Manton is a residential neighborhood in Providence, Rhode Island and part of
Johnston, Rhode Island. It is in the westernmost part of the city. of Providence
The town of North Providence borders it to the north, Johnston to the west,
while the neighborhoods of Hartford, Olneyville, and Mount Pleasant border it
inside Providence. Separating it from other Providence neighborhoods to its east
are Rushmore Ave, Chalkstone Ave, Smith Street, and the Triggs Memorial Golf
Course. The Woonasquatucket River separates it from Johnston to the west.
Throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, Manton remained a rural agrarian region.
The eponymous Edward Manton was one of the original land owners, whose family
would accumulate a huge tract of land. Toward the late 18th and early 19th
centuries, the proximity of the Woonasquatucket River was responsible for the
establishment of a few tanneries in Manton and neighboring Olneyville. The rural
location of Manton made it ideal for the establishment of vacation homes. A
stagecoach inn was one of the earliest places to take summer vacations. In 1835,
the hotel was converted to a school. In 1862, the school was demolished to make
way for present-day Rhode Island College. Taking advantage of the water power
provided by the Woonasquatucket River, early industrialists established mills,
the first two being constructed in 1827 and 1830. Railroad lines running east
through Olneyville to Downtown facilitated the rapid development of the area,
which was heavily industrial by the end of the 19th century. The closure of the
textile mills and collapse of heavy industry encouraged the exodus of working
class residents to the suburbs. A public housing project, Manton Heights, was
built in 1953, and may have contributed to the white flight. During the 1970s
Manton lost 15 percent of its population. By the 1980s Manton Heights had, like
so many public housing complexes, fallen into disrepair. The Manton-Fruit Hill
Neighborhood Association was founded about this time and encourages neighborhood
participation and improvement.

Mount Pleasant is a working-class residential neighborhood situated in the
northwest of the city of Providence, Rhode Island. It is bordered by Olneyville
to the south, Valley to the east, Manton to the west, and Elmhurst to the
northeast, and the Town of North Providence to the north. The major street
boundaries that define Mount Pleasant are Academy Avenue to the east, Smith
Street to the northeast, Atwells Avenue to the south, and portions of Bullock,
Chalkstone, Mera, and Rushmore Avenues to the west. Mount Pleasant is one of
Providence's most stable neighborhoods. According to the 1990 census, less than
half of all Mount Pleasant residents moved into their current residence in the
past five years; nearly four out of ten residents had lived in their present
unit for more than a decade, and almost one out of five had lived in his or her
current home for more than 20 years.

Mount Pleasant was one of the last sections of the city to be developed, and as
a result, most of the houses are of medium size on well landscaped lots and
tree-lined streets. Although some houses were constructed in the 19th century,
most were built in the early 20th century. The majority of the land area in
Mount Pleasant served as farm land through much of the 18th century. By the
1730s, two roads had been established to facilitate produce delivery from the
outlying farms to the market downtown. The roads included the northern branch
along present-day Douglas Avenue and Eaton Street, and the southern branch along
Chalkstone Avenue. The area of Mount Pleasant remained sparsely populated until
around the end of the 19th century. It wasn't until the 1880s when streetcars
traversed Chalkstone Avenue that the neighborhood would see a significant number
of houses constructed. In the early 1900s, a neighborhood commercial strip
formed along Chalkstone Avenue between River Avenue and Mount Pleasant Avenue.
That commercial strip remains a thriving part of the neighborhood today,
including a full-service grocery store, a bank, service stations, pharmacies,
bakeries, tailors, barber shops, meat markets, restaurants, and pubs.

Olneyville is a neighborhood in Providence, Rhode Island bordered by Atwells
Avenue to the north, U.S. Route 6 to the south and Rhode Island Route 10 to the
east. The Woonasquatucket River runs through the southern portion of the
neighborhood. The area is roughly triangular. Olneyville Square is a major
traffic intersection in Olneyville, defined by the intersection of Westminster
Street, Broadway, Hartford Ave, Plainfield Street, and Manton Avenue.

Settlement in Olneyville began at Olneyville Square in the early 18th century.
The area began as a center of trade with a nearby Narragansett village. Larger
settlement began in 1785 after Christopher Olney, for whom Olneyville is named,
founded a grist mill and a paper mill on a wide part of the Woonasquatucket
River. Olney was a captain during the Revolutionary War and owned a 95 acre farm
in the area. By the end of the American Revolutionary War, a forge and foundry
and other small industries operated in Olneyville.[1] Through the mid-19th
century, Olneyville developed as a railroad junction and mill district. This
attracted many Polish immigrants. However, the mill industries declined after
World War II causing economic decline. The construction of the Route 6 connector
in the 1950s exacerbated these problems. In the two decades that followed
Olneyville witnessed a substantial drop in its population.[1] On May 15, 1900,
Olneyville was the site of one of the few occasions of "raining fish", when a
late afternoon thunderstorm brought perch and bullspouts falling from the
skies.[2]

Former warehouses and mill buildings in Olneyville were home to a number of
artist collectives including Fort Thunder in the 1990s. Since 2000, many of
these buildings have been purchased by developers who plan to convert them into
luxury condominiums. However, proposals to develop the Olneyville area have met
some local opposition, caused by fears of gentrification. In March 2007, the
Olneyville Neighborhood Association (ONA) declared its opposition to plans from
the United Way to move their headquarters from the East Side to Calender Mills
in Olneyville.[3] In July 2007, during a meeting of the Providence City Council,
the ONA declared a "tax strike" to protest a proposed property tax increase.
Residents of Olneyville and Silver Lake expressed concerns that the proposed tax
increase would force poorer residents from their homes and declared that they
would not pay the amount of any property tax increase.[4]

The West End is a neighborhood in the southwestern part of Providence, Rhode
Island in the region often referred to as the South Side. Its boundaries are
delineated by Westminster Street to the north, Huntington Avenue to the south,
Elmwood Avenue to the east and the railroad tracks with Route 10 to the west.
Cranston Street runs through the center of West End, past the Cranston Street
Armory which has given the neighborhood the alternative name of the "Armory
District."

The first settlement of the area took place shortly after King Philip's War in
the form of farming. In 1739, Obidiah Brown built the Hoyle Tavern at the
intersections of Westminster and Cranston Streets, near present-day Classical
High School. Early settlers built houses nearby to the tavern. In the 19th
century, the area developed industrially and residentially with several
factories built near the now-filled Long Pond. Residential construction followed
after a horse-drawn coach started serving the area in 1855 and a streetcar in
1865. North of Cranston Street developed a white middle-class neighborhood of
one and two family houses, while south of it, double and triple decker houses
were built to accommodate increasing numbers of Irish, French Canadians, and
blacks. Following the urban decline of the 1930s, the West End has become a
slowly decaying inner city neighborhood as middle class residents left. The
adjacent Huntington Industrial Park in Olneyville had kept industry nearby, but
when Gorham Manufacturing Company left the area Olneyville lost importance as a
freight rail hub. Further, Route 10 was constructed, physically separating the
West End from the rest of the city. In recent years, new residents have worked
to improve and renovate the area's housing supply, particularly the more
historic houses, including turning older houses into affordable rentals.
